Title: Top This and Other Parables of Design

----

Year: 2016

----

Tags: outdoor

----

Text: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetuer adipiscing elit. Aenean commodo ligula eget dolor. Aenean massa. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Donec quam felis, ultricies nec, pellentesque eu, pretium quis, sem. Nulla consequat massa quis enim. Donec pede justo, fringilla vel, aliquet nec, vulputate eget, arcu. In enim justo, rhoncus ut, imperdiet a, venenatis vitae, justo.

----

Builder: 

----

Author: Selected Writings by Phil Patton

----

Book: 

## Top This and Other Parables of Design

## Selected Writings by Phil Patton

### Introduction by Edward Tufte

##### Copyright © 2016 by Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum

##### All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior consent of the publishers.

##### Published by Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum 2 East 91st Street New York, NY 10128, USA cooperhewitt.org

##### Distributed Worldwide by ARTBOOK | D.A.P. 155 Sixth Avenue, 2nd floor New York, NY 10013, USA artbook.com

##### Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

##### Names: Patton, Phil, author. | Cooper-Hewitt Museum, issuing body. Title: Top this and other parables of design : selected writings / by Phil Patton. Description: New York, NY : Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum, [2016] | New York, NY : Distributed Worldwide by ARTBOOK / D.A.P. | ?2016 | Includes bibliographical references and index. Identifiers: LCCN 2015051433| ISBN 9781942303152 (pbk.) | ISBN 1942303157 (pbk.) Subjects: LCSH: Design--United States--History--20th century. | Design--United States--History--21st century. | United States--Civilization--20th century. | United States--Civilization-- 21st century. Classification: LCC NK1404 .P38 2016 | DDC 745.40973/0904--dc23 LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2015051433

##### Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum

##### Pamela Horn Head of Cross-Platform Publishing

##### Matthew Kennedy Image Rights &amp; Publishing Associate

##### Design: Neil Donnelly

##### Production assistance: Sean Yendrys

##### Typefaces: Century Schoolbook BT Roman and Monospace

##### Paper: 50 lb. Trade Book

##### ISBN: 978-1-942303-15-2

##### 2014 2015 2016 2017 / 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

##### Printed in U.S.A.

##### All content included from The _New York Times_ © 2006, 2007, 2008, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 The New York Times. All rights reserved. Used by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of this Content without express written permission is prohibited.

Contents

7 Acknowledgments

8 Foreword by Caroline Baumann

Director, Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum

10 Introduction by Edward Tufte

12 Typologies Syllabus

School of Visual Arts, New York, Fall 2010

20 In Praise of Possums

_GEO_, Jul. 1980

33 Classic American Chairs

_Diversion_, Jun. 1989

40 Chapter One: The World in a Package

_Made in USA_, 1992

63 Up from Flatland

_New York Times Magazine_, Jan. 19, 1992

72 Some Pig

_The Village Voice_, Apr. 7, 1992

76 Cyber Fibers

_Esquire_, Sep. 1992

80 Spirals Are Going Around

_Esquire_, Feb. 1993

84 User Interface Design: Making Metaphors

_I.D. Magazine_, Mar./Apr. 1993

96 The Big Book: Put Out to Pasture

_I.D. Magazine_, May/Jun. 1993

100 Top This: Coffee-Cup Lids

_I.D. Magazine_, May/Jun. 1996

112 Dead Eurocrats: The Colorless-ness of the European Community’s Money

_Slate_, Feb. 27, 1997

118 Road to Nowhere

_Highway. America’s Endless Dream_, 1997

124 Time Worn

_I.D. Magazine_, Nov. 1999

130 Technology in the Office: Individual Power and Collective Standards

_On the Job_, 2000

146 For the Frustrated Carpenter

_New York Times_, Nov. 2, 2000

150 Home of the “Potato Chip”

_Dwell_, Oct. 2001

156 Grilles Are Asking to Be Taken at Face Value

_New York Times_, Nov. 17, 2003

162 The Language of Auto Emblems

_AIGA_, Apr. 6, 2004

171 50/50: The 50 Biggest Changes in the Last 50 Years

_American Heritage_, Oct. 2004

180 Futuro Flashback: The Prefab from Another Planet

_New York Times_, Jul. 28, 2005

186 Pixar’s ‘Cars’ Got Its Kicks on Route 66

_New York Times_, May 21, 2006

192 Body Language: How to Talk the Designers’ Talk

_New York Times_, Apr. 1, 2007

198 The Virtues of Avoiding Interstates

_New York Times_, Aug. 5, 2007

204 In Debates, the Furniture Is the Message

_New York Times_, Oct. 11, 2008

210 A 100-Year-Old Dream: A Road Just for Cars

_New York Times_, Oct. 12, 2008

216 Foreword: Time of the Taylors

_Autodesign International_, 2010

220 Secret Cars Kept Under Wraps, in Public

_New York Times_, Nov. 7, 2010

224 Old Dreams, New Art Form

_Automobile_, Dec. 23, 2011

230 In Prada’s Spring-Summer 2012 Collection, Shoes with Tailfins

_New York Times_, Jan. 18, 2012

232 To Be Cute as a Bug Isn’t Enough Anymore

_New York Times_, Jan. 20, 2012

238 The Greatest Grid: The Master Plan of Manhattan, 1811–2011

_The Architect’s Newspaper_, Feb. 10, 2012

246 Spoiler Alert:

‘Mad Men’ Shifts Gears

_NYTimes.com_, May 6, 2013

250 Wright’s New York Showroom, Now Just a Memory

_New York Times_, Jun. 23, 2013

256 In Praise of Knobs

_Car and Driver_, Oct. 2013

260 A Concept Goes from Paper Sketch to Metal Reality

_New York Times_, Oct. 29, 2013

266 Robert Rauschenberg: BMW 635CSi, 1986

_BMW Art Cars_, 2014

272 I Didn’t Recognize You from Behind

_New York Times_, Mar. 9, 2014

276 When Cars Ruled the World’s Fair

_New York Times_, Apr. 13, 2014

282 And Then My Car Chimed In, After It Nudged Me in the Rear: High-Tech Grace Notes Alter the Driving Experience

_New York Times_, Sep. 21, 2014

288 Bibliography

289 Image Credits

290 Contributor Biographies

293 Index

Many were touched by Phil Patton’s passing on September 22, 2015. We are especially indebted to Kathleen Hamilton for her trust and generosity in sharing Phil’s work and friends with us to help make this book possible.

Thank you to the contributors who gave from their hearts, including Donald Albrecht, Michael Cannell, James Cobb, Russell Flinchum, Thomas Girst, Paul Herzan, Molly Fulghum Heintz, Jean Jennings, Cara McCarty, Christopher Mount, Lucy O’Brien, Wendi Parson, Chee Pearlman, Bernd Polster, Neil Selkirk, Edward Tufte, and Hampton C. Wayt. A special thanks to Caroline Baumann, Brooke Hodge, Matthew Kennedy, Alix Finkelstein, Matt Flynn, Allison Hale, Joelle Herr, and Sean Yendrys. Neil Donnelly, thank you for your intimate and thoughtful design process. The result is a personal and portable companion for those looking to always have a witty and special friend around.

Pamela Horn

Head of Cross-Platform Publishing

Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum

> Foreword

> Caroline Baumann, Director, Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum

Phil Patton made the often-heard statement, “design is everywhere” come to life and reverberate. A compassionate, curious, unforgettable man who dove into subjects from Adirondack chairs to windshields. Phil helped us open our eyes to examine objects at a level far deeper than their surfaces.

_Top This and Other Parables of Design_, an eclectic selection of Phil Patton’s writings introduced by his closest friends and colleagues, spans more than three decades and enables all readers to discover and celebrate Phil the way so many of us did—through his unique lens and genius wordplay. The contents, including snapshots of his personal notebooks, magazine articles, design criticism, essays, and even a course syllabus, bring to light the incisive and empathetic thinking that made Phil an icon and one of design’s most beloved voices.

Phil loved Cooper Hewitt. We personally benefited from his wisdom and insight through his regular and close involvement. It is with profound appreciation of Phil’s generous spirit and friendship that Cooper Hewitt publishes this book. Thank you to everyone who contributed, and in particular, warm and enormous thanks to Kathleen Hamilton, Paul Herzan, and Pamela Horn.

We miss you, Phil.

> Introduction

Phil Patton looked at ordinary objects so intensely

that they became extraordinary.

And then he explained to all of us why they were so extraordinary.

Edward Tufte

> Typologies Syllabus

> SVA MFA Design Criticism     DCG-6090, 4 credits    Mondays, 1:00–3:50 p.m.

> September 13–November 15

> Fall semester 2010

> Second-year course

> Instructor: Phil Patton

> Email: philpatton@msn.com

> Phone: 973.454.1396

#### COURSE OVERVIEW

As far back as Aristotle, philosophers have understood that insight comes from analyzing what is the same and what is different in classes of objects. Typologies have since shown up in artworks by Andy Warhol, photographs by Bernd and Hilla Becher, and in informational graphics by Edward Tufte—all as a means toward deeper comprehension. In this class, students will identify an object, a building, or a graphic element, and assemble and evaluate variants of it. By looking at types and typeforms (coffee-cup lids, magnetic car ribbons, military-unit patches, manhole covers around the world), students will learn to identify what doesn’t change in a design in order to come closer to its essence.

A typology might be based on a category of product, a shared designer, or a common material. Aristotle opposed essence with accident—the type is the essence, its variations the accident. Our investigations will look at both aspects.

#### COURSE SCHEDULE

Monday, September 13

Introduction, Typologies in art and culture. Typology defined. The lesson of material culture. Change and persistence. What can design learn from the material culture all around us? How does design reflect society?

Reading (in advance):

— Patton, Phil. Coffee Lids essay, _ID Magazine_.

— Deetz, James. In _Small Things Forgotten: The Archaeology of Early American Life_: chapter 4, “Remember Me as You Pass By.”

— Moneo, Rafael. “On Typology,” _Oppositions 13_ (1978).

— Conway’s Law: Any design reflects the organization that creates it. http://www.melconway.com/research/committees.html

Monday, September 20

How can we discuss types? From type to archetype. Vocabulary: typology, topology, morphology, homology, typeform and archetype, taxonomy.

Reading:

— Pulos, Arthur. _American Design Ethic_: foreword and single page (handout).

— Rapaille, Clotaire. _Seven Secrets of Marketing in a Multicultural World_: foreword.

— Sudjic, Deyan. _The Language of Things: Understanding the World of Desirable Objects_: chapter 2, “Design and its Archetypes.”

— Forty, Adrian. _Objects of Desire: Design and Society Since 1750_: chapter 4, “Differentiation in Design.”

Monday, September 27

Evolution 1: How much does design resemble evolution and how? Type and variation over time.

Reading:

— Banham, Reyner. “A Throwaway Esthetic” in _Design by Choice_ (website).

— Hara, Kenya. _Designing Design_: foreword.

— Kunkel, Paul. _Digital Dreams: The Work of the Sony Design Center_: “What time is it?”

— Loewy, Raymond. Handout: “most advanced yet acceptable,” MAYA. “Progress.”

— Barringer, David. “Evologo” from _There’s Nothing Funny About Design_: pp. 27–34.

— Asma, Stephen T. _Stuffed Animals and Pickled Heads: The Culture and Evolution of Natural History Museum_: select pages.

Monday, October 4

Evolution 2: Marginal differentiation. How and why does a type vary and change?

Reading:

— Gopnik, Adam. “The Fifth Blade,” _The New Yorker_, May 11, 2009.

— Beck, Ernest. “Sharper Image: Gillette versus Schick,” _ID Magazine_, June 2004.

— Patton, Phil. “Gillette Razor Test Drive,” _Seven Days_ magazine, 1988.

— Mahar, Lisa. _American Signs_, pp. 34–52.

Monday, October 11

Does design create too many variations? Is typology out of control? Do we have too much choice?

Reading:

— Postrel, Virginia. “I’m Pro Choice,” (and interview) _Forbes_, March 28, 2005.

— Schwartz, Barry. _The Paradox of Choice_: introduction and chapter one.

Designer guest (short).

Monday, October 18

Colorways: color as variation. Ford black vs. General Motors color. Any color as long as it’s black to any color you want. The typology of the palette. Pantone and Crayola, shoes and other products with “colorways.” When Kodak’s Brownies went pastel and Dell went “lollipop.” Crayons: defining the box of eight and the box of 64.

Reading:

— Ford, Henry. Selection from _My Life and Work_.

— Sloan, Alfred. _My Years with General Motors_: p. 235.

Monday, October 25

Variations on a Product Type 1: The Shell over the Machine. And Hats 1. The Stapler. Swingline and Arrow, “Red Stapler.”

Reading:

— Steinberg, Neil. _Hatless Jack: The President, the Fedora, and the History of American Style_: introduction pp. vi–xxvi.

— Lukas, Paul. “The Evolution of the Baseball Cap” (D-Crit website).

— Optional: Robinson, Fred Miller. _The Man in the Bowler Hat: His History &amp; Iconography_.



Monday, November 1

Variations on Product Type 2: The Helmet and Hats.

Reading:

— Tenner, Edward. _Our Own Devices: How Technology Remakes Humanity_: chapter 10, “Hard-headed Logic,” pp. 238–62.

— Patton, Phil. “Team Logos,” _Metropolis_.



Guest: Edward Tenner

Monday, November 8

Transcending Types and Diagramming Typologies. Graphic and software devices for comparison—typologies in charts, top ten lists, pedigrees, boxes, _Consumer Reports_, online dynamics. Edward Tufte’s Small Multiples: “small, thumbnail-sized representations of multiple images displayed all at once, which allows the reader to immediately, and in parallel, compare the inter-frame differences.”

Reading:

— Car charts (handouts).

— Patton, Phil. “Passing the Torch: An Evolution of Form,” 2008, _New York Times_ online.

— Tufte, Edward. _Envisioning Information_: “Small Multiples.”

Monday, November 15

The face and individuality as social design. How does design express personality? From August Sander’s faces of class to happy faces, smiling cars, and “pareidolia”: seeing faces in nature.

Reading (and looking):

— Robert, Francois. _Faces_.

— Kalman, Tibor and Neil Selkirk, _1000 Faces on 42nd Street_.

— Semi-random photography of pedestrians.

Guest: Photographer Neil Selkirk will talk about the design of the project for 42nd Street portraits. We compare these to the experiments of social and portrait typology in Walker Evans subway series and August Sander’s class and social studies.

#### NOTE

This is not a writing course, as such, but still requires clear, jargon-free writing. The course will depend on students shaping its general themes to their own interests. Students will be expected to enrich the common class experience and discussion with reports from their particular fields.

#### ASSIGNMENTS

Each student will be asked to formulate and present an analysis of a typology.

The point is to define a type, assemble examples (probably requiring images), and analyze and extract a point or lesson from the typology. It is expected each analysis will run roughly 1,000 words and several or more images, along with links and references. These analyses can be presented in any form to the class, but eventually they can be posted on a blog or the D-Crit site for feedback.

Each class meeting, beginning with week 4, will involve presentation of two or more of these.

A key goal of the course is to make us look at things in new and surprising ways. So students are also asked to bring in brief items I call “noticed”—but others might call “show and tell”—that are relevant to the class and will surprise and delight us. These can be a simple image, an object, or a sentence. Teaching assistant will set up blog for these to be posted as well.

Schedule is subject to change.

Examples of themes for possible typological study:

— Sunglasses

— Shampoo containers

— Notebooks

— Baseball stadiums

— Five thousand–dollar watches

— Five-dollar watches

— Postcards of the Empire State Building

— Time-capsule contents lists

— Recent products made of bamboo

— Karim Rashid blob-shaped objects

— The VORs of Texas (Center for Land Use Interpretation)

— Stiletto-heeled shoes

— Potato peelers

— Folding chairs

— iPhone cases and covers

> When Phil wrote about possums or many other tangible, objective subjects, he frequently managed to turn the story into a celebration of a southern culture he adored adoring; whether personified as here in Basil Clark, or elsewhere in Chuck Yeager, or Colonel Sanders, his delight in their delight in their own personal style simply takes over the story.

> —Neil Selkirk

(image: patton 15.jpg)

##### In 1972, Clark received the almost inevitable audience with candidate Jimmy Carter, who, like the possum, fell back on his grin.

## In Praise of Possums

### _GEO: A New View of Our World,_ July 1980, pp. 108–24 (excerpted article)

We had driven most of the night to get there, racing through the swamps in a four-wheel pickup, guided by the distant baying of the dogs on the trail of the possum. “God knows what-all kinds of places in the swamp them dogs know,” Ritchie mused as he stopped the truck and stood listening to his dog, George Wallace. Looming over Ritchie, in his Buddy Holly horn-rims, stood his sidekick Bubba, a man with the build of a football lineman and the face of a bearded elf.

Ritchie started calling the dog, yodeling, “Wallace, Wallace, Wallace,” over and over again like some kind of range-finding beam. “We’re goin’ in,” he said finally, in a tone that suggested a Marine invasion. We trudged downhill through the brambles, our lights boring snaky tunnels through the darkness. A miner’s helmet with a powerful head lamp kept rolling around on my skull, and my waders, about three sizes too large, threatened with a sucking sound to sink into the swamp with every step.

We reached a moss-draped tree where two eyes were glowing like live coals from an upper branch. Ritchie called out, “Speak, George Wallace!” and the pitch of the baying moved up a notch. Ritchie cupped his hands in front of his mouth and made a sound of pure, abstract animal panic, something between a heartbroken tomcat and a police siren.

“A coon’ll stare at the moon,” Ritchie said, “but a possum just freezes.” He fired one shot from his .22 and hit the limb where the animal sat. “He coulda hit either one of them lights if you told him to,” Bubba whispered. “He’s just trying to scare it down.”

Sure enough, the animal moved down a limb, then, a moment later, made a desperate leap out into the swamp. The dogs were on him in an instant. But apparently unconcerned with the snarling attackers, the possum curled up on the ground, rolled his eyes and stuck out his tongue. A yellow-green musk oozed from beneath his tail. His lips curled back over a range of teeth—50 of them—in something like a sneer, an uncannily human little smile that mocked not just the dogs but death itself. It was the Grin. The possum was “sulling”—that is, playing possum—the one trick his strange breed has used to survive for 130 million years.

In an instant, the dogs’ enthusiasm deflated like a pierced balloon. They sniffed the prostrate animal for a while, then slunk away with a few desultory whines. Long after we had left the swamp, after Bubba had built a bonfire and cracked open a bottle of bourbon to warm us, the vision of that Grin lingered.

The possum, _Didelphis virginiana_, is quite simply the weirdest animal in all of North America, a relic of the Cretaceous, a shuffling gimmick of an animal, a joker in evolution’s varied deck. A relative of such odd creatures as the bandicoot, the phalanger, the wombat and the Tasmanian devil, this bizarre creature is the only marsupial that is still surviving in North America. The possum is also the only nonprimate to sport the opposable thumb of which man is so proud, and he figures as a kind of embarrassing distant cousin who keeps showing up to remind us of our shrewlike ancestors running around amid the dinosaur eggs.

Poor folk in the South have traditionally been attached to the possum, both as edible meat and as a folk character. But in the past few years, southern society at large has discovered the critter. In the suburban strips of the New South, pickup trucks with “Eat More Possum” stickers have become as campily popular as CB radios, Dolly Parton and barbecue. Every Labor Day in Mobile there are possum races, and Clanton, Alabama, hosts an annual International Possum Show. Moonshiners have found hungry possums a handy way to dispose of used corn mash before the “revenooers” can spot it. Even science has caught on to the possum. Researchers see our own genetic reflection in the possum’s Grin. For studies on cancer, digestion, developmental biology and reproduction, the possum has become the hot new model in laboratory animals.

There is, to be sure, more than a trace of hype in the current possum vogue. Although southern blacks and poor whites long ago managed to convince themselves that persimmon- or peach-fed possum, baked and “squatted down” in sweet potatoes and gravy, is fine eating, the truth is that possum meat is barely edible at best. The taste falls somewhere between stringy chicken and pork, and the meat, wrapped in a gauze of suet, tends to be greasy. Public markets in several southern cities still offer possum, but some indication of its dubious nature as food is attested to by the custom in New Orleans that at least one paw be left on a dressed possum to assure the buyer that he is not getting some old alley cat.

Among the upper classes in the South, eating possum became camp early in this century. Possum clubs, with membership as tightly regulated as any country club’s, held annual possum feasts. In 1930, when the Depression was making possum look like better and better eating, New York governor Franklin D. Roosevelt came to White Sulphur Springs, Georgia, to visit one of these possum clubs. With his eye on higher office, he impressed old-line southern Democrats by riding along with the hunt and partaking of the cooked animal. A series of wonderfully posed photographs show FDR, car-bound, sitting suspiciously close to a suspiciously calm possum on a tree limb and later helping himself to a hefty and presumably _second_ serving from a huge platter of possum.

The whole expedition was no doubt good for some key convention votes a couple of years later, but you can’t help suspecting that—as usual where the possum is involved—the visiting Yankee governor had been made an object of the Grin.

Possumnal theatrics go right back to the beginning of the animal’s relations with Western man. In 1500, one Vicente Yañez Pinzón, captain of Columbus’s ship the _Niña_ and leader of subsequent expeditions to the New World, brought the first possum ever to visit Europe back to King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain. With a sure instinct for the publicity stunt, Pinzón persuaded Their Catholic Majesties to insert their royal hands into the pouch of what he called “this incredible mother.” There, in the court of Castile and Aragon, the Grin shone forth.

The possum that went to the court was a Brazilian one, but its cousins to the north already figured heavily in Indian lore. There are possums in Mayan and Aztec tapestries. The Hopewell mound-building culture carved pipe bowls in the shape of possums, with eyes of native copper or freshwater pearls. To the Algonquin, the possum was known as _apasum_, “the white animal,” and it was by this name that Captain John Smith made its acquaintance at Jamestown. Thus was born the unfortunate initial _o_, which no connoisseur of the animal uses today.

Many folk tales have focused on the possum’s curious reptilian tail. Most hold that it was once furry and beautiful until the rabbit or the cricket or the wolf trapped the possum in some scheme that left in denuded. Another version claims that the strings for the first banjo, the invention of a slave on a riverboat, were made from the fur of a pet possum. Much black folklore refers to the possum’s inherent wisdom; there’s a saying: “What de fox know, de possum learned long ago.”

As time went on, human observers tended to see the possum as more and more human. Walt Kelly probably carried this anthropomorphization the furthest in making a possum the hero of his comic strip _Pogo_. From time to time, Kelly worked a pun into his strip that Latin classes had been having fun with for years: _ita possum_—“I can.” A few years ago, cartoonist Saul Steinberg did Kelly one better in a cartoon of an especially contemplative specimen generating a thought balloon: “ . . . _ergo possum_.”

No man, however, has better appreciated or further humanized the possum than one Frank Basil Clark of Clanton, Alabama. The founder and president of the Possum Growers and Breeders Association of America, Inc. (PGBA)—motto: A registered possum is a better possum—Clark is the species’ greatest publicist, lobbyist and showman. He is the P. T. Barnum of possumdom. He is also a drive-in theater owner, a geologist, a philosopher, a hypnotist who cures migraine headaches and the mayor of Clanton.

Since he incorporated the PGBA in 1971, it has grown to over 50,000 members, including Richard M. Nixon, the late Emperor Haile Selassie and me. Upon payment of the $15 dues, the member receives a certificate, a card for his wallet and an “Eat More Possum” license tag. But the requirements for membership are strict[.]

. . .

“Had a bunch of possums rustled the other day. They were good possums—somebody’ll sell ’em for research. These weren’t just old range possums, they were registered possums.

“The _o_ in _possum_ is silent, you know, like the _p_ in _swimming_.

“The possum can save the world from starvation. We can breed sixty- or seventy-five-pound possums and feed the world. They’re cheaper than chicken, nutritious and cholesterol-free. In fact, they clean out your arteries like a Roto-Rooter.”

. . .

Sitting in Clark’s office, I heard what are undoubtedly large portions of his standard possum lecture. It ranged from possumnal anatomy to observations on Einstein, parapsychology, Kirlian photography, faith healing, how to stop smoking, Ockham’s razor and local tax policy.

“The possum is the missing link between the cold-blooded, egg-laying duck-bill platypus and the warm-blooded mammal. It’s neither cold-blooded nor warm-blooded but somewhere in between. They have a built-in radiator in their tail. That’s why in the summer you’ll always see a possum licking his tail. It cools ’em off.

“When they had the races this year in Mobile, everybody was feeding them beer. It was a real hot day, and they’d just lap it up and then start licking their tails. They have a good liver, so they can hold their liquor.

“There were so many people at the races this year I couldn’t even get through to see my own possum race. They was eight and ten deep. The track is a horseshoe, so they won’t stop when they see the end. You have to prime ’em like this”—he dragged an imaginary possum along the floor by its tail, as if powering up a mechanical car—“and then you let ’em go.

“Are they dumb? Hell no, or they wouldn’t be here. They’re smarter than a whip and snake-mean. You know how they’re all the time grinning like they know something nobody else don’t know? Well, they do. They’ve seen it all.”

. . .

The International Possum Show, held annually at the Chilton County Fair outside of Clanton, marks the pinnacle of the theatrics that have characterized the creature’s relations with men. Some years, there is even the crowning of a Possum Queen. The anointment of the Beauregard itself is such a moving experience that a spectator from Talladega, Alabama, was inspired to pay $10,540 some years back for the animal, although there are rumors that the sum was tendered in Confederate currency.

There is something circuslike about the whole affair. On the morning of the show, Clark was on the phone rounding up a quorum of possums—“Vern? You got some possums you can bring to the show tonight? Sure would like to see y’all out here.”

Just before show time, Clark pulled out a sheaf of possum rating sheets and handed me a bunch. I understood that I was being asked, as a member in good standing of the PGBA and a representative of the news media, to be a judge. “You can just _tell_ a good possum,” he said, soothing my doubts.

Clark went over the rules. “Any possum that bites twice is automatically disqualified,” he said and, almost as an afterthought, added: “And any judge who _gets_ bit twice is disqualified.”

. . .

There were about 20 possums in the show, not a record turnout. In addition to the traditional names like Stonewall, Jeff Davis, Jeb Stuart and such, there were possums with names like Spitfire, Tough Jack and Struttin’ Stuff. We judges were cautioned to look for frostbitten ears and not to be too hard on dirty tails. “A lot of folks use a little Bon Ami and Mr. Clean on the tails, but they haven’t had time tonight,” Clark said.

We were reminded that the color should be judged relative to variety. Since this was an international show, there were black “Mexican” possums there, as well as the gray Virginia or the reddish-to-cinnamon Carolina possums touted by many members of the PGBA. But the crucial qualities, it became clear, were the first listed on the rating sheet: “general character, balance and size.” This phrase continued to roll off Clark’s tongue all evening. To demonstrate character, a possum should on no account sull. He or she ought generally to regard the judging with the same calm seriousness Clark himself evinces.

As we worked through the elimination stages of the judging, the possums were remarkably decorous. Scientists and amateur raisers alike agree that in captivity a possum’s character alerts demonstrably. Few domestic possums sull; that night only one did. Even when lifted rudely from cages or hauled along on secondhand poodle leashes, the possums remained oblivious to handlers and to the giggling teenage girls and snickering farm boys starting to file into the stands.

Several possums calmly established themselves atop the posts of the pen. Only two started to fight, and only one made the possumnal noise of exasperation. The sound is like someone throwing cold water on hot bacon grease.

. . .

In the end, when Clark tallied up the sheets, we judges were all surprised to find out how nearly we had agreed. “You _can_ tell, can’t you?” Clark asked with a sidewise glance.

While a distant bull bellowed and the sounds of the county fair midway drifted into the pen, the winners were raised onto the table beside their trophies and ribbons. As the Polaroids were taken, the possums stared straight into the camera, their dignity complete, their character attested. “Look at ’em,” Clark said proudly. “You can tell they know they’re champeens. Look at the way them possums model.”

But as the animals kept their poise, something was missing. The only Grin in evidence appeared on the face of Frank Basil Clark.

A lot of Frank Clark’s science is considerably more colorful than accurate, but like much of the possum folklore, it is sometimes surprisingly close to the truth. When Clark says that possums are snake-mean, for instance, he may actually be understating his case. Folk wisdom holds that possums are really _meaner_ than snakes and can defeat them in combat. A few years ago, a Baltimore animal expert named Jack Kilmon took the folk tales seriously. He ran laboratory tests and found that the possum is the only animal around immune to the hemotoxic venoms of rattlesnakes, cooperheads and water moccasins—poisons that break down the cell membranes of most creatures. Even the mongoose can’t claim this distinction.

But the possum is less the “missing link” Clark calls it than a curious throwback. Evolution did not proceed in a neat, straight-line manner from platypus to Neanderthal. In fact, the eutherian mammals, to which our species belongs, and the marsupials represent two parallel limbs on the tree of evolution. Each line once fielded entries for the same list of ecological niches, rather in the way that Ford and Chrysler offer comparable lines of automobiles.

Over the eons, however, the eutherians, with their internal reproductive systems, have been more successful than the marsupials, with their pouches for the young. Marsupials have survived chiefly in Australia, New Zealand and South America, cut off and protected by the geological convulsions that split the continents millions of years ago. The possum is the only marsupial that has been able to make a go of it in North America, to which it migrated from the south.

There are 64 species of possumlike animal living in the Western Hemisphere, from the yapock of Central and South America to the lesser Trinidadian opossum. But the adaptability of _Didelphis virginiana_ has given it the widest range, from Costa Rica into southern Canada, where it tolerates temperatures of as much as 20 below. Contributing to the possum’s success have been the reduction of its natural predators (only partially offset by the arrival of its greatest predator ever, the automobile) and the catholicism of its appetite. The possum is an “opportunistic omnivore,” favoring insects, persimmons, berries and leaves in season, with the odd dead cottontail or other animal as a change of pace. Eighty percent of a possum’s diet is vegetable, and while possums, like most woodland animals, will eat dead meat, they are not the graveyard robbers of legend.

A built-in dispersal mechanism—possums simply aren’t sociable—keeps possums on widely spaced ranges. Carroll Allan of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources conducted a project to measure the possum’s range. To the amusement of his fellow researchers, he equipped possums with radio collars—and found that individual Georgia possums ranged over as much as 200 acres, generally remaining close to streams for water.

Among such solitary, nocturnal creatures, love is generally a ships-passing-in-the-night sort of affair. The female is likely to attack and even castrate a male who pushes his advances when unwanted. When mating does take place, it is accompanied by a series of happy clicking noises. Frank Clark is one of the few men who has been able to breed the possum in captivity. His secret: “When that Grin changes to a smile, they’re ready to breed.”

. . .

While Clark talks about the possum as a “missing link,” [Dr. William] Jurgelski more circumspectly says that it has “adapted differently from other animals and is extremely sophisticated in its own peculiar way.” Clark, who sells some of his animals to researchers, explains the possum’s usefulness to science by saying, “You don’t start out learning about automobiles by looking at a Lincoln Continental; you start by looking at a Model T—and the possum is a Model T.” In more academic terms, Jurgelski refers to the possum as “the most primitive and generalized of marsupials, a useful model, a test-bed.”

. . .

Jurgelski and his fellow possumologists have one more grand scheme under their hats. They want to send young possums into _space_ aboard the Space Shuttle to observe their growth in orbit. To possum lovers everywhere, the implications of this are staggering. Such a project means one small step in the U.S. space program—and one giant leap for possumkind.

## Classic American Chairs

### _Diversion,_ June 1989, pp. 195–98, 329

### From rockers to recliners, Adirondacks to aluminum chairs, these seats were designed for comfort.

The most comfortable chair I own is one covered in velour. Its back tilts to the perfect angle at the touch of a lever. The seat adjusts at the push of a button, its cushion growing firmer or softer with the flick of a switch.

This chair is located directly behind the steering wheel of my car. It is the product of up-to-the-minute ergonomics and smart marketing, but it is also the descendant of a whole tradition of American chairs that combines mobility and comfort. If this chair were in my living room, my friends would laugh; but why should I be any less comfortable at home than on the road?

American chairs are moving chairs. They adjust, or they fold up completely to go somewhere else. Like Americans themselves, they combine love of ease with restlessness, mobility with stability, gadgetry with simplicity. They are not the elegant and distinctive chairs of the drawing room but instead are sometimes rough mass-produced seating for porch or yard.

#### The Rocking Chair

The quintessential American chair is the rocker, which, as de Tocqueville noted, affords both motion and rest, a combination particularly well suited to Americans. A long-discredited but persistent myth holds that Benjamin Franklin invented the rocking chair. In fact, this adaptation of the cradle was used in England long before Ben but the rocker really came into its own in the United States. All kinds of chairs have sprouted rockers through the years, from stately New England Brewsters, as big and resolute as oxen-drawn sleighs, to aluminum tubular chairs, whose rockers make them take on the air of those small planes that land on Alaskan lakes.

On the frontier, the rocker offered a little bit of leisure when the sun went down, the mule was fed, the cow milked, and pine knots glowed in the hearth. Hundreds of craftsmen reinvented the rocker during the 19th century in the form of metal-sprung and what looked like Rube Goldberg–designed shapes. The simple rocker also evolved into grander parlor furniture, fit for the gilded age. The swanlike shape of the rocker in which Abraham Lincoln was shot was as far removed from the simple rockers he would have known on the Kentucky and Illinois frontier as the White House was from his log cabin. But this chair was more characteristic of him than the throne made of stone in which he is depicted in his monument in Washington.

In the grand hotels of New England, where vast covered porches housed rockers parked like so many cars, the rocking chair was seen as a device not only for relaxation but for physical therapy. This was part truth, part myth: The truth was borne out by John Kennedy’s use of the rocker for his back problems, while the myth is carried on by the manufacturers of mechanical chairs touted on late-night television as the remedy for all sorts of aches and pains.

Recently, the sturdy, basic American rocker has undergone a revival. One fashionable model, made by the Georgia firm of Brumby, which has its roots in the years of the Reconstruction, has a sturdy oak frame and a woven cane seat and back, proportioned to fit the generous figures of the late 19th century. Even Conran’s now has a version of the veranda- or porch-style rocker, which comes with a twist: bright colors of paint covering the wood that traditionally wore only a high varnish or simple white.

#### The Ladder-back Chair

To furnish my first, bare New York apartment, I shipped in chairs from the North Carolina mountains. They were rough, unfinished chairs of the genus _ladder-back_ and the species “mule’s ear,” or sometimes “rabbit ear,” because of their pointed tops. They had enjoyed no lathe-work treatment; they had no fancy urn-shaped finials topping their back posts. Pencil marks still showed the places their maker had carefully cut for the back “rungs” in the posts. The seats were the originals, woven of oak splints, and 30 years later are dried and cracking.

Like Appalachian speech and song, these chairs have roots in the folk furniture of England and continental Europe. They are the sort of chairs Walker Evans photographed in sharecropper cabins in Alabama. In Texas, the oak-rush seats gave way to cowhide. The Shakers took the basic form and straightened it into unworldly uprightness—the mule’s or rabbit’s ear flares up like a little flame, or a Brancusi bird sculpture.

The back slats that give the ladder-black its name are curved to meet the curve of your back, and the seats have just enough give to them to adjust to any body. The Shakers—and many present-day Yankee restorers who don’t have oak trees and drawknives handy—resorted to weaving the seats out of fabric strips. Though Shaker is all the rage today, I think the hillbilly version of the chair is more comfortable; it is certainly more human.

#### The Adirondack Chair

The Adirondack chair sums up a stylized attitude toward “the natural.” It was originally the product of the great camps and resort hotels of the Adirondacks, Berkshires, and eventually Maine, where the cult of the “rustick” reigned in post–Civil War America. This cult’s first efforts turned up uncomfortable chairs of twisting limbs with the able chairs of twisting limbs with the bark left on—so-called “stick” furniture. But the search for rusticity was even then in conflict with the appreciation of comfort, and finally the Adirondack chair struck the right balance.

With its long, tilted back and seat angled against level arms, the Adirondack chair in silhouette suggests a simple cabin or a dock on a lake. Its design is optimistic: It sits like a tail-dragger airplane ready for flight.

Those who built the Adirondacks eschewed the lathe, that basic tool of most furnituremakers, and with that gave up the curve. Instead they used straight lines and simple boards, assembling planes into a three- dimensional sculpture of uncommon comfort. The Adirondack was in its own way as visionary as the furniture of Gerrit Rietveld, the Dutch prophet of the de Stijl movement. Looked at another way, it is an easy chair broken down into planes and carried outside, the way Picasso broke down a guitar or an absinthe cup to create a cubist sculpture.

But the basic Adirondack could also take on variations beneath the blade of the jigsaw. A bevy of young architects are reinterpreting its design, investing the traditional form with new life. In Maine, I recently visited an old boys’ camp where a variety of Adirondacks were on display: green Gothicized ones, gently streamlined ones, some stout versions, and so on.

Smith &amp; Hawken, the noted California garden supply house, offers one of the more elegant adaptations that incorporates touches of art deco. The five planks that make up the back have been rounded at the top, recalling the familiar smoothed-over edges of a 1930s skyscraper whose ascending stories taper inward to meet zoning codes. The arms are similarly curved into little wings, and the beams of the seat, or tail, narrow like the stern of a sailboat. An optional trim footrest or stool ramps up like a loading dock to the front of the seat. Similar chairs from companies like Pottery Barn and Conran’s come in colors like Chinese red and mariner’s blue, whereas the traditional item was, as a rule, green or white. They are cedar, while the original was pine or occasionally oak.

#### The Director’s Chair

The director’s chair is one of many outgrowths of American “camp furniture,” the casual, mobile styles that have been our country’s great contribution to world seating. The camps where this chair got started, however, were military ones. Civil War photographs show generals sitting in them. But the chair is descended from Greek models: Long before McClellen and Grant, Alexander the Great likely plotted strategy while perched on one.

The director’s chair went on safari, and when the movies came along it assumed its familiar identity: What is movie making on location anyway but a kind of safari in which cameras replace guns?

#### The Aluminum Lawn Chair

The aluminum chair has its antecedents in aviation. The tubular frame with crisscrossed supports resembles a pilot’s chair, just as the material is that from which airplanes are fashioned. World War II produced the capacity and technology that made aluminum inexpensive enough; plastic webbing emerged as an “up-to-date” material for the seat; and the suburban expansion of the 1950s provided the demand.

I have around my patio table a set of chairs from Conran’s that are identical to those in the Tuileries Gardens in Paris. There, little old ladies dressed in black used to come around and collect the token amount you were supposed to pay for the privilege of sitting in these stiff folding chairs, purposefully chosen for their lack of comfort, I suspect, so one isn’t encouraged to linger. My chairs are free, but guests still avoid them, opting instead for the classical aluminum and plastic mesh chairs. They are more comfortable than the stiff folding Tuileries chairs, something I divined when real French people visited my house and made a beeline for them.

The aluminum lawn chair has been underappreciated, largely, I think, because of the places it has been seen and the people who have been seen sitting in it. But with its deceptively simple combination of squared-off loops and the carefully calculated amount of give to the webbing, the aluminum chair is a small marvel of engineering.

Today it is made mostly in the Orient, and industry has produced even cheaper knockoffs, practically disposable models such as the plastic grid chair available at Kmart and its like for as little as five dollars. I believe the aluminum chair is ripe for a new lease on life, possibly with sporty colors to replace the familiar green and white.

#### The Recliner

“The easy chair had to be preceded by the desire for an easy posture,” writers Witold Rybczynski in _Home: A Short History of an Idea_, and if there was anything the early European travelers to America remarked on it was such a desire. The characteristic posture of the frontiersman, they reported, was the slump, with hands in pockets; even such a mighty general as Grant was noted to slouch.

Transportation helped create the American mechanical easy chair. It developed from the first railroad seats that folded back into beds, and later it benefited from airplane seats and such car seats as the advanced tubular frame seating in the 1934 Chrysler Airflow. (When Nash motors introduced front seats that reclined to full prone in 1948, customers snickered and parents complained.) The eventual result of the scientific and pseudo-scientific study of the body that went into transport was the big mechanical recliner—the La-Z-Boy, the Barcalounger, and the like.

It is appropriate that Archie Bunker’s recliner is in the Smithsonian. Nothing better sums up his character or the principles for which he stood. The recliner is Archie’s worldview summarized—the throne of his self-esteem. Enjoying rest honestly earned by hard work, Archie delivered his opinions from it, sinking back into its cushions as into the easy certainties of his archconservative ethos. He worked hard and thought lazy.

The Archie Bunker lounger suggests a larger lesson: Where we sit and the way we sit is not accidental, and perhaps it is critical to the way we see the world. Ultimately, our chairs can become extensions of ourselves. As our ancestors have for centuries, we select and adjust them to fit our personalities as well as our bodies.

> When I mentioned to Phil that _Made in USA_ figured prominently on the syllabus for my graduate-level class in American popular culture, he responded with a dismissive wave and called the book “ancient history.” As an emerging design historian, largely encouraged by Phil to pursue this course of study, I had to disagree. While some of the things of America have become obsolete, the premise and themes of the book still ring true. I return to my well-worn copy often, and am constantly amazed at the fresh insight and inspiration its pages reveal.

> In _Made in USA_, Phil pinpoints the core ideals embodied by American things–the desire for mobility, both physical and social, and the primacy of convenience. Further, he explores the paradoxical relationship between the mass-produced object and individual expression, which advertising and design seek to reconcile.

> —Wendi Parson

(image: patton 10.jpg)

##### The portable desk designed by Thomas Jefferson in 1775, on which he wrote the Declaration of Independence.

## Chapter One: The World in a Package

### _Made in USA: The Secret Histories of the Things That Made America,_ New York: Grove Weidenfeld, 1992, pp. 3–33 (excerpted chapter)

Thomas Jefferson wrote the Declaration of Independence on a portable, folding desk of his own design. “It claims no merit of particular beauty,” he wrote of the “writing box.” “It is plain, neat, convenient, and, taking no more room on the table than a moderate quarto volume, it yet displays itself sufficiently for any writing.”

Jefferson’s traveling desk neatly packed his world up into a box. A tilted stand rose to support paper and pen, and a tiny drawer, cleverly opening to the side, held writing materials. It was a do-it-yourself project: Jefferson designed it himself and had it put together of mahogany by the cabinetmaker in whose house in Philadelphia he rented rooms while attending the Continental Congress.

Jefferson’s desk was a model of what American things were to become: light, portable, flexible, and tailored to their owner: Doing-it-yourself required such devices; independence required the pursuit of invention. To assemble, denote, abbreviate one’s world was to assert your control over it—and to take it with you. The American obsession with mobility—in space, in time, in class, in identity—so deep that it seemed to extend into the individual bones, lay behind the shape of all sorts of American things.

What have we made well? How and why have we seen ourselves as often reflected in things as in institutions or places or practices? Why have we sought individuality in the things we hold in common, invested ordinary things with extraordinary meaning, so often sought the spiritual in the material?

The common conviction around the world is that Americans are materialists; true, but in what way? How did devices become the vehicle of our desires—the desire at once for individuality and the desire to belong, the desires for individual power and individual distinction, so easily manipulated and apotheosized by advertising and marketing?

Our economy was built on the industrial techniques developed in the textile and clock and gun factories of New England. Today, those long disused brick buildings, punched out with great processions of brick- arched windows, house microelectronics enterprises—or museums. . . .

Today, when we lament the decline of American manufacturing, decry the merely paper products of leveraged buyouts, we hear again and again that “Americans don’t make anything any more.”

But what is it that we used to build and make that inspired us, that we found beautiful—beautiful in shape and in engineering? What are these beauties, the beauty of the well-designed, well-thought-out, well-made thing, occupying that territory where engineering overlaps styling?

Every country has its representative objects. They are the stuff of national caricature and cliché: the Japanese transistor radio or the shoji screen. The German Mercedes or Braun appliance. The Italian espresso maker or Vespa motorcycle. Napoleon sneered at the Swiss as the people who invented the cuckoo clock, but he would surely have issued his army Swiss army knives—an equally persuasive national symbol—had they existed.

Nowhere have such symbols been as numerous, as valued, and as sought after as in the United States. We have shown an almost desperate hunger for such objects of self-definition, objects to sum up our character, epitomize our industry, mark our history. Presenting his original folding desk to his granddaughter’s husband, in 1825, Jefferson wrote: “If then things acquire a superstitious value because of their connection with particular persons, surely a connection with the great Charter of our Independence may give a value to what has been associated with that. . . . Its imaginary value will increase with the years.” He went on to envision the desk being “carried in the procession of our nation’s birthday, as the relics of the saints are in those of the church.”

But something more than superstition or imagination lies behind the national inclination to see larger meanings in ordinary things. Only in America do we, as a matter of convention, call our favorite objects “icons.” The term has been expanded to cover trademarks, national monuments such as the Statue of Liberty, movie stars, and political figures. . . .

. . .

Our icons tend over time to recede into gauze of celebration and nostalgia, like old dogs, buildings, and politicians. They need to be periodically reexamined—disassembled into their contradictions and complexities hidden beneath the sleek shells of mythology.

Two great ideals shaped American design: that of the perfect model and that of the kit of parts. Objects such as Jefferson’s desk have themselves been declarations of independence. American design has always sought to enable the individual to distinguish and improve himself. Even when mass-produced and universally owned, American objects were aimed at magnifying the power of the individual. The creation of standard, “democratic” models of products mediated the relation of individual to society.

. . .

The story of our artifacts is the story of the long and never resolved struggle between the basic model and the customized object, between the unadorned object and the appliqué kits of decoration, between the engineer and the salesman, the sunflower and the gilded lily. National infatuation with Henry Ford’s uniform Model T was succeeded by General Motors’ success in selling variety—creating thousands of little infatuations out of the great infatuation with choice. Other companies continue to copy its example; “marginal product differentiation,” they call it. The press release of a contemporary linen company boasts that its patterns of sheets, bedcovers, and other fabrics could be combined in so many different ways as “to make individuality a virtual mathematical certainty.”

. . .

Jefferson kept his desk for fifty years, took it to France with him, to the shifting capitals of the United States, and finally to the White House. Geography—the extent of the country and its primitive transportation system—helped generate a desk like Jefferson’s. Transportation has always been a dominant need and determinant of American life. Ships and boats, railroads and automobiles, aircraft and spacecraft, have been the means through which the shape of the land itself has shaped American technology and culture. The mobile life inspired a host of inventions and designs. What more characteristically American innovations are there than the railroad bogie and the cowcatcher? The bogie, the work of early railroad developer Ross Winans, was the combination of twin axles on a swiveling base to help keep cars on the uneven and twisting rails of American tracks. The cowcatcher, the projecting plow at the front of the locomotive, testifies to the ingenuity of Isaac Dripps, a New Jersey mechanic of the 1840s. It did not catch the cows, of course, but pushed them and other obstacles off the tracks in front of the locomotive. In England, the track would have been fenced, but in the United States there was no money for that, and barely enough to build railways at all over great distances. Animals were often unfenced in those days, except in the more permanently settled areas of the country. Later, in the West, the railroad finally was enclosed—by the new machine-made fence, barbed wire, an American invention for which the railroads were the largest customers.

Distance demands transportation, which demands portability, which demands a special sort of object. Many American things unfold, from Jefferson’s desk to the chuck box that Texas rancher Charles Goodnight stuck on a wagon in the late 1870s to feed his cowhands, to George Pullman’s train berths, to the latest portable laptop computers—the electronic successors to Jefferson’s desk. The plank berth of the canal boat, unfolding like Jefferson’s desktop, was the size, Charles Dickens wrote in an 1842 letter, “of this paper—I know. I measured it.” It was an unfolding bed even narrower than Jefferson’s “moderate quarto volume.”

That berth was the ancestor of George Pullman’s bed, despite the legend that the folding beds in Pullman’s railroad cars were inspired by those in the miners’ cabins of the Colorado Silver Rush of the 1850s. By then, Pullman had already lost a fortune touting a previous design and other inventors had worked on the pulldown bunk as well. But the story is appropriate nonetheless. The key was not invention but publicity and marketing. His first fancy railcar, the _Pioneer_, was made famous when it carried Lincoln’s body home from Washington to Springfield.

American objects move, pack up, are portable. As Reyner Banham puts it: “The man who changed the face of America had a gizmo, a gadget, a gimmick—in his hand, in his back pocket, across the saddle, on his hip, in the trailer, round his neck, on his head, deep in a hardened silo. The typical American way of improving the human situation has been by means of crafty and usually compact little packages.”

. . .

Many of Jefferson’s gadgets were acquired, like the polygraph, in Europe. The Duc de la Rochefoucauld- Liancourt, the French linen magnate and a cosmopolitan traveler, visiting Monticello in 1796, wrote of Jefferson that “his travels in Europe have supplied him with models.” The writing box probably had a French model.

. . .

But all the European models were modified to local construction and local needs; they were domesticated. Among Jefferson’s most important popularizations was his Francophilia. After one of his trips to the Continent, he added to Monticello skylights of the sort he had seen in Europe, ripping out a whole room above his bedroom to make way for them. A plaster cast of the Maison Carré, the Roman temple in Nîmes, was shipped home to serve as the prototype for his design for the Virginia state capitol.

Over his lifetime, Jefferson designed and had several more portable desks built. They each contained a copying machine—first a copy press, which used a sort of crude carbon paper to reproduce a written page; then a polygraph, a mechanical copying apparatus that, through an elaborate series of joints and hinges, drove a second pen over paper to duplicate the writing of the first. They were desks turned into machines. His obsession with such devices led him to write more than a hundred letters—some of them while president—to Charles Willson Peale on the subject of copying, which was a fascination shared by James Watt, the inventor of steam engines, and Benjamin Latrobe, the engineer and architect.

Jefferson’s desks were of a piece with his other gadgets: a rotating bookstand held open several volumes at once—“He would read one then t’other,” reported his slave Isaac Jefferson. His swivel chair, a modified Windsor, enabled the omni-talented, omni-interested, and omni-occupied man to swing quickly from one task to another. His dumbwaiter and turning cupboards shielded guests from encountering the “servants,” as the slaves were called. His bed, poised between bedroom and study, was watched over relentlessly by a clock and could be lifted like a Pullman berth to the ceiling. His chaise longue, equipped with a standing desk, allowed him to recline and work at the same time. All were devices for the magnification of the individual, machines for expanding the effect of one man’s thoughts and intellect, and aimed at the great American ideal, convenience. In this they presaged a whole line of American devices.

The gadget is always a mechanical shortcut for reducing labor; which has always been the great pursuit of the American mechanic, at the factory scale or the scale of the individual in his den. It may seem odd for a man as little given to rest or recreation as Jefferson to invent for convenience, but it is convenience that frees time and energy—just as all the modern conveniences “liberate” the housewife.

Jefferson saw the universe as basically mechanical. He was a man with a modern sense of time. In the age of the rooster and church bell, it may have been shocking to wake up, as Jefferson did, so that the first thing you see is a clock. But today most of us wake up to the sound as well as the luminescent image of an alarm clock or radio.

Jefferson’s love of gadgets, as well as his determination to record his letters, was so obsessive that it was almost pathological. He noted seemingly every penny he spent, but when he left the White House he did not realize that he was thousands of dollars in debt. He was the kind of guy who would have read _Popular Mechanics_. If his goal—not just an American one—was to create order in a disorderly world, as the most common explanation has it, there was also a flight from reality in the process. Some of the gadgetry—the dumbwaiter and the revolving serving facility, for instance—served to hide the fact of slavery from his consciousness, even while much of this furniture and equipment was fabricated by Jefferson’s slave Thomas Hemming. Jefferson’s chairs and desks were the forerunners of the patent chair in Melville’s _Confidence Man_, designed to assuage not only the aching body but the troubled conscience.

Jefferson was a model, both conscious and unconscious, for future creators of American objects. His chaise longue inspired the designer Niels Diffrient’s “Jefferson chair,” with its seeming dozens of adjustable surfaces, all “ergonomically” shaped, and its swiveling arm for a computer monitor. But even the La-Z-Boy lounger in which Archie Bunker watched television is in some ways a bastard descendant of Jefferson’s chaise.

. . .

Even as Jefferson contemplated it from his desk, the process of mechanization was already at work in the mills of New England and at Paterson, New Jersey, where Alexander Hamilton and Pierre L’Enfant laid the basis for future American industry. L’Enfant designed raceways (an industrial approximation of the boulevards he laid out for Washington, D.C.) to provide water, liquid motive power, from the Great Falls of the Passaic, so that in years to come emigrants could sweat in the hot factories making silk dresses, so Samuel Colt could have a place to manufacture his first revolvers, and so the first locomotives in the United States could be built.

Such fascination with the mechanical, we now know well, destroyed the independent agrarian life that Jefferson idealized.

. . .

Jefferson’s vision of a nation of farmers unspoiled by what he believed to be the inevitable corruption of cities and industries was at war with his love of gadgets. He was fascinated by steam engines, which would shatter any semblance of the quiet agricultural country he imagined. The notion of a bucolic life made more secure by the introduction of the proper machines was refuted by the cotton gin, which buttressed slavery in the South. The yeoman became the blue-collar laborer, subjected to the squalor of “industries” Jefferson feared.

. . .

What is striking about all the various writing boxes Jefferson designed is their obsessively neat and specific compartments. Here is the list he drew up of the contents of one of them, carefully keyed to his drawing:

### wafers, sealing wax, seal, hair . box, shaving brush, ink phial, ink pot, dividers, drawpens, pencil, rubber, thermometer, magnetic needle, scissors, knife, whetstone, scale, razor strap, razors, toothbrushes, comb, night cap, ring dial, damping brush, scales, monetary steelyards, tape measure.

It is a catalogue of personal trivial items—the kit of a life in a box—with overtones of nonsense: “Of shoes—and ships—and sealing wax—/ Of cabbages—and kings.” But for Jefferson, who mixed diplomacy to royal courts or worries about American naval strength with agriculture and domestic invention, it was a life in summary; more than an office away from home, it was Monticello in a box. . . .

. . .

Our objects are models of ideas; they are kits of associations. American design is animated by the tension between the model—the single, universal appliance—and the kit—the set of parts from which one constitutes one’s own version of the thing. There is a complex interplay to the relationship: a dialectic between the individual and the collective. When it enters the life of use, the universal object can become a personal one; collective designs can be used as a kit from which the individual can assemble his identity, becoming machines for self-improvement, self-expression, and self-invention.

Manufacturers, packagers, and industrial designers have traded on this tendency; advertisers have exploited it. The irony is that the evocation of power and possibility for the individual has been the most effective means of selling things in massive numbers. It may be true that here is no business in America _but_ show business; most of the things we have made have been their own packages. Packages themselves have been a national obsession. We have been fascinated with the jar, the box, the barrel, the paper bag, the tin can (from its standard cylinder to the can shape used for meat), the ice cream “bucket” later adapted for Chinese food and fish bait, the milk carton with its little roof, and of course the Coca-Cola bottle, that best known icon of the American way in a package. But what is also basic to packaging is the mysterious relationship of surface to solid, of the die-cut box to its assembled form, of the individual specimen to the mass—a series of relationships whose exploration was to become the stock in trade of Pop and other sixties artists.

The package is a dominating national metaphor; celebrities even hire firms to package themselves. In America, common things themselves have enjoyed a special status as packages in a different sense—containers for emotions, aspirations, and associations. De Tocqueville’s theory of the American as a creator of social associations could be extended to our regard for the objects of daily life as well as the structures of social life. We defined ourselves by association with objects, and objects by their associations.

The associations of the object are about individualism—an idea and a word still so unfamiliar in the English of the time that the first translator of de Tocqueville felt the need to apologize for its use. Europeans early on noticed what they perceived as the materialistic side of American culture. But they had it backwards: it was a spiritualism of matter. And if, as Europe noted, we tended to regard simple packages as complete things, it was because we regarded things as mere packages. “Americans,” declared Gertrude Stein, “are materialists of the abstract.”

. . .

The American propensity for packaging, which began with such literal innovations as the Mason jar, the paper sack, and the cardboard box, would eventually reach the abstract implications with which we are familiar: movie stars and candidates for office are “packaged,” presidents raise public ire with new “tax packages,” and on third down passing situations football coaches send in their “nickel and dime packages” of defensive backs.

Packing things in new ways became important in the United States because it was needed: the geographical dispersion of the population and the development of the mass market made it necessary. A whole range of unsung heroes of packaging emerged to create the shapes with which we were to become familiar.

In order to distribute beef from the American West in the days before refrigerated railcars, the tin- canning industry boomed, helped along by the Civil War’s demand for transportable preserved foods. After the war, the corned beef can, with its tapering shape to allow for removal of the contents, became a familiar image, thanks to Libby, Armour, Swift, and other meat magnates, whose fortunes grew at the same exponential rates as those of the railroad kings whose systems distributed their products.

For the new department stores, the paper bag was a vital symbol of the fixed price, the neatly wrapped and standardized transaction that replaced the haggling of the small general store. In 1852, Francis Wolle patented the first paper bag–making machine; his Union Paper Bag Machine Company was to seize 90 percent of the market.

Luther Childs Crowell, a frustrated airplane designer fifty years ahead of his time, patented his own machine to make paper bags in 1867, then refined its design to produce the square-bottomed bag that became universal in department stores and later supermarkets. In the 1880s, Charles Stillwell developed the “self-opening” sack, with pleats or gussets, ready to snap open at the flick of the salesclerk’s wrist.

Another paper bag maker, Robert Gair, watched his workers printing seed bags in 1879. A sharp raised rule in one plate cut the paper in addition to simply printing it and, the story goes, inspired Gair to develop the die for cutting a foldable cardboard box. He was hailed as the “father of the folding box,” and by the end of the nineteenth century Gair City in Brooklyn was turning out millions of them.

In the way these warm brown packages turned almost miraculously from flat objects to solid ones, there was something deeply American, at once clever and false, like an instant Western town with false fronts and tents behind, or like the instant culture adopted by an uneducated industrialist grown rich, raising his European-inspired mansion like a circus tent.

With the invention of the machine-made container, the familiar printed packages of what, beginning in the 1880s, would become national brands followed: National Biscuit’s Uneeda Biscuits, Kellogg’s cereals, soap powders such as Sapolio and Gold Dust, and previously bulk products like Quaker Oats. With such commercial changes, packaging had superseded packing; the container and the contained entered into a new sort of relationship. Packaging changed what was inside, implied a special status for what might previously have been a generic product—“branded” it into something different.

The primary example of the package that became virtually indistinguishable from the product it contained was the Coca-Cola bottle, which achieved the fame previously enjoyed only by generic types of containers such as the Mason jar.

The Coca-Cola bottle demonstrated the power of sheer ubiquity to imprint an image and the sense of an object on the collective mind. It arrived when the drink itself was twenty years old. The beverage, its logotype, its diamond-shaped label, and its name were widely imitated by dozens of other colas. Coke’s lawyers found that the variety of local bottle shapes and labels did not make their task of patenting easier. The impetus for creating a standard national container for Coke was to resist imitators.

Before the standardization of the Coca-Cola bottle, the beverage created by “Doc” Joe Pemberton (a patent medicine salesman who had previously pushed such compounds as Triplex Liver Pills) had been dispensed from soda fountains and distributed in a variety of bottles varying with the local bottler. At first, regional licensees such as Joseph Biedenharn of Vicksburg, Mississippi, bottled Coke in wire and stopper bottles. By 1892 the Crown cap, the familiar crimped metal seal, had appeared and the bottle narrowed its neck to accept it, producing something like the generic soda bottle of today.

One major bottler, Benjamin F. Thomas, argued in 1910 to fellow bottlers that “we need a new bottle—a distinctive package that will help us fight substitution . . . we need a bottle which a person will recognize as a Coca-Cola bottle even when he feels it in the dark.”

In 1913, the company requested proposals for a distinctive, national bottle. In 1916, a convention of the loosely federated licensed Coca-Cola bottlers met in Atlanta and chose, from among several candidates, the design proposed by the Root Glass Works of Terre Haute, Indiana.

Root’s Swedish plant manager, Alex Samuelson, headed up the creation of the design. But Earl Dean, a machinist and moldmaker, seems the more likely drafter of the shape itself, and an accountant named Clyde Edwards claimed to have shown Dean encyclopedia entries on the shapes of the coca and cola plants. The inspiration for the ridges is said to be the coca bean, but it is more likely the coca bean pod—which is not involved in the beverage at all. It may also have been inspired by the fashionable “hobble” skirts of the day.

The first proposal was much fuller than the final shape—imagine the familiar bottle crossbred with a Chianti bottle. But it did not fit the bottling machinery or crates of the day and so was slimmed down. To our eyes today, the revised version is a dramatic improvement. But had the bottle as originally designed fit the functional requirements, might it not have come to seem as familiar and beautiful as the version actually produced? Samuelson was credited on the patent, which was not issued until Christmas Day, 1923, but C. J. Root received a royalty of a nickel a gross, which was to make him the richest man in Indiana: in the next forty years, 6 billion bottles would be produced.

Even when appreciated by the eye rather than the hand, the tactile quality of the bottle—Benjamin Thomas’s ideal of recognizability in the dark—was a major part of its appeal. Thomas Lamb, the designer known for his ergonomically shaped knife handles, praised its fit to the grasp. In addition to echoing, in reverse, the fluting of a classic column, the ribs had a practical virtue. Condensation drips down the grooved sides, allowing for a sure grip even on an August day in New Orleans. This practical feature, and the fact that the bottle’s glass had been made thicker in areas on which it would strike when dropped, made the Coca-Cola bottle, it seemed to Raymond Loewy, “a masterpiece of scientific functional planning,” as well as “a transcendental glass package.” Loewy, who was to design soda fountain dispensers and other items for Coke, gave abundant evidence of wishing that he had designed the bottle itself. He had to settle for claiming authorship of the Fanta bottle, an elegant shape, but one that could not hope to compete.

Today, the fact that Andy Warhol and Robert Rauschenberg made use of the Coke bottle as a “found” object, framed in quotation, is testimony that it has achieved, like the famed Campbell’s soup can, a status that in an earlier time would have been reserved for a natural or a generic-made object.<sup>1</sup>

. . .

For many years, the location where each Coca-Cola bottle was produced was molded into its base. The bottles were interchangeable among local bottlers and it became common practice for children to search for the most exotic origins. This, its particular green, the chips and abrasions of its base, gave every bottle a sense of history and mystery. You could look into the green the way you looked into amber, seeking signs of the past. You would wonder what lips had drunk from the bottle before yours. In the fifties, the company estimated that each bottle during its lifetime would be filled, emptied, and refilled an average of thirty-seven times.

In the old family house in North Carolina where I spent summers as a child were assembled Coke bottles molded with especially distant locations. Beside them were ranked Mason jars full of vegetables and jellies, their contents extracted from the vegetable garden struggling against bird-filled blackberry bushes of the slovenly back lot.

That house was full, too, of older Mason jars and ancient whiskey bottles, shaped like log cabins or beehives, of brown pottery churning jars and mountain baskets. It was also, however, full of objects that were potential containers of family and historical meaning: ancient tools, a flintlock rifle with powder horn, dozens of handmade ladderback chairs. And the strangest were the objects recently become old, such as the telephone, a Henry Dreyfuss design of 1930 not so very different from the fifties models I knew, but somehow a world away. The vacuum cleaner was an Electrolux that looked like a lounge car on the _Twentieth Century Limited_. The refrigerator was a Raymond Loewy Coldspot, and it had run unfailingly for a quarter of a century, deficient only in its capacity for ice cream. My grandfather’s huge La-Z-Boy sat in front of the gigantic brown cube of an early television set—simulated wood grain, lacquered and polished to a bright, impenetrable surface. Those objects were already history to a child, but they did not yet have histories for me. They were strange and fascinating containers, without contents.

The ruling myth about American designs is that they sprang magically from the wilderness, the product of atavistic ingenuity in face of an unprecedented landscape and experience, with few overseas sources. The “new man” makes “new things.” Restored to contact with wilderness, the once again “natural man” makes “natural things.” The corollary is a myth of equally deep roots: that American design is naturally “plain” and “functional.”

. . .

This was the basis of European appreciation of things American—of things not artistic in themselves, but made artistic by being viewed in a European frame. . . .

It was the same basis on which Le Corbusier and other European modernists appreciated American grain elevators and factories. In 1882, long before Le Corbusier, Oscar Wilde arrived on the dock in New York. He was European aestheticism embodied, and a crowd of reporters met his ship. The lily—symbol of the aesthetic movement, beloved of the Pre-Raphaelites—was his favorite flower and personal symbol. He told the reporters who met him that he sought beauty everywhere. “Could that have aesthetic value?” a reporter asked, pointing to a grain elevator across the harbor. “Might beauty then be in both the lily and Hoboken?”

Before his tour was through, Wilde had forgone wearing his lily boutonniere. Instead, on his tours through America he sported the sunflower. Wilde chose it shrewdly. It served him as a symbol of the new sort of beauty he was seeing—a simple, almost cartoon flower, of practical use, grown in front of sod houses on the prairie for oil and animal food—a flower whose beauty was unexpected and incidental, an icon of American beauty.

. . .

. . . The New World replaced the traditions of the past with the tradition of the future. A continent lacking both financial and cultural capital was working out do-it-yourself, ad hoc solutions, borrowing against the bright and inevitable future—for some new technology, new invention, new idea would surely come along before the old one was paid for. De Tocqueville talked to a man who explained to him the intentionally weak construction of steamboats: within two or three years, he was told, better machines would already have been designed, and they would be obsolete anyway. Mississippi riverboats were created for a life of three or four years.

In a hurry, Americans built to deadline. Despite the skills of craftsman and mechanic, it is a quality of American products to be no better than they have to be to get the job done. Planned obsolescence is not simply a creation of the twentieth century and the need to sell more products; it is built on a long tradition of the temporary and provisional, in turn built on a belief in progress that accompanies faith in the improvability of the individual.

. . .

The bathroom was the first room to be modernized. Chippendale, remarked the designer Paul Frankl, “never designed a bathroom.” It was a setting for “clean”—the word takes on new meanings for modernist design—shapes that James Cain wonderfully describes in _Mildred Pierce_ as “a utile jewel.” Henry Dreyfuss was designing toilets and other fixtures for Standard by the thirties, and Buckminster Fuller was proposing mass-produced, single-unit Dymaxion bathrooms. Within a decade, colored toilets, sinks, and bathtubs would become available. When Italian design began to emerge as a powerful force after World War II, one of the most noted designs, right up there with the Cisitalia or the Olivetti Lettera typewriter was a toilet designed by Gio Ponti, the father figure of modern Italian design and editor of the influential magazine _Domus_. Today, we have Warren Platner contouring fixtures—the ads claim—to those of the human form, and bathroom expert Alexander Kira examining the ergonomics of the urinal, toilet, and sink. In _The Bathroom_, Kira addresses this shaping to accommodate the contours and dimensions of the body. “The particular combination of size and shape may vary over a considerable range so long as certain criteria are met,” he writes of the urinal. “When we consider that the stream assumes the form of a warped conical solid with a shifting base, it is obvious that the size and shape of the necessary container or enclosure are directly related to its distance from the point of origin in order to contain the stream completely.” The urinal was no inevitable form, but the product of design, just as surely as a chair or table. It was also the result of mass production. There were, at least in theory, thousands of specimens of Duchamp’s urinal.

Mass-produced objects such as the urinal, the shovel, or the bicycle wheel were identical because they were made from patterns, models. The physical item was a mere model of the ideal one. Duchamp understood this. For him a replica was as good as original, as he proved when the snow shovel he had picked up at a Columbus Avenue hardware store was mistakenly appropriated by a museum janitor in Minnesota for practical purposes and had to be replaced.

It was in this spirit—as the experienced, even jaded European appreciating the simpler American with a dose of condescension—that the American plain style received its definition, even by Americans. What was aesthetic in America was—because found, incidental therefore somehow natural—as natural as “the natural man.” Machine-made shapes, oddly enough, were the work of this natural man. But how could the machine also be natural? Because its shapes appeared to proceed from the basic Platonic geometries.

“Machines are, visually speaking, practical applications of geometry,” wrote Alfred Barr in the catalogue to the Museum of Modern Art’s _Machine Art_ show of 1934.

In that exhibit, curators Barr and Philip Johnson treated design according to an aesthetic of the found object. The _Machine Art_ show accomplished something like Duchamp had: it took ordinary manufactured objects and presented them as aesthetic. Among the objects featured in the show was a Crane Company flush valve; it would have attached very nicely to the urinal Duchamp had displayed as _Fountain_. Some of the objects were literally designed by “function”: the propellers, the ball bearings. They had to be shaped that way to work, and no other. They were geometric because physics is geometric and they were objects of motion.

But the arrangement of the objects, the way they played off each other, also was a critical part of the show’s effect. The harmony of line and rhythm of shape praised by the show’s organizers was supplied in part by their arrangement together—propeller lines echoing the curves of metal bowls, and so on. The assemblage was to modernism what the intricately spiraled pattern in which edge tools and Colt revolvers were arranged at World’s Fairs was to high Victorian decoration.

The Museum of Modern Art show provided the kernel for the museum’s design department: the permanent acceptance of machine-made objects as a form of art. So one could find at the museum such items as radios and television sets and a GRiD laptop computer that recalled Jefferson’s desk. And always foremost among the display were propellers of exactly the sort in which Duchamp had found the first challenge to high art: lovely, sensuous blades compounded, like Jefferson’s ideal plow, of mathematics—equations turned into metal.

##### 1 Andy Warhol, who made as effective use of the Coca-Cola bottle in his art as he did of the soup can, summed up the universality of the beverage this way: “A Coke is a Coke, and no amount of money can get you a better Coke than the one the bum on the corner is drinking. All the Cokes are the same, and all the Cokes are good. Liz Taylor knows it, the President knows it, the bum knows it, and you know it.”

(image: 9-1-85 #1_MadeInUSA.jpg)

##### Patton notebook, September 1–November 14, 1985

## Up from Flatland

### _New York Times Magazine,_ January 19, 1992, pp. 30–1, 61 (excerpted article)

### These data-filled days, there’s more to graphs and charts than meets the eye. For information designers like Edward Tufte, vision is the art of seeing the invisible.

In 1570, the first English translation of Euclid’s _Elements of Geometry_ was published. On the page that discusses the pyramid, the printer pasted in a small paper model that can be folded upright from the page. One copy of the book found its way into the library of Ben Jonson. Today it belongs to Edward R. Tufte, a 49-year-old professor of political science and statistics at Yale University. At home in Chester, Conn., Tufte holds the book in his lap and carefully unfolds the thick, darkened paper pyramid from the page. “Only Ben and I have done this,” he says with a mischievous grin.

For Tufte, who reproduced the standing pyramid in his book _Envisioning Information_, published in 1990, the pyramid is a miniature monument to the dream of escaping the two-dimensional surface. “Escaping this flatland is the essential task of envisioning information,” he writes. “For all the interesting worlds (physical, biological, imaginary, human) that we seek to understand are inevitably and happily multivariate in nature. Not flatlands.”

Tufte (pronounced TUFF-tee) has become a prophet of “information design,” the design of graphs, charts, diagrams and other visual elements. With more and more facts and statistics available, information design has become a focus of increasing attention in the news media. Graphs and charts can replace thousands of words or numbers, economically summarizing and explaining things on the page or screen. The last few years have seen the arrival—in newspapers and magazines, on television and at business presentations, from _USA Today_ to CNN—of a new generation of innovative information designers. Richard Saul Wurman, a designer and publisher, breaks cities down into neighborhood maps, visually signifying restaurants, shops and so forth, in his Access travel guides. Nigel Holmes, in his book _Pictorial Maps_, outlines the ideas behind the cartoonlike “infographics” he creates for _Time_ magazine. Tufte himself, with his focus on fidelity to statistics and historical principles, has consulted for CBS, NBC, _Newsweek_, the _New York Times_ and the Bureau of the Census. IBM has hired him to review the design of computer interfaces and manuals.

By Tufte’s calculation, there are between 900 billion and two trillion statistical graphics printed annually worldwide. “Clutter and confusion are failures of design, not attributes of information,” he declares. “There’s no such thing as information overload.” Too much data, perhaps, but not too much information. His scrutiny and analysis have been directed at everything from weather maps to the inscriptions on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, from diagrams of the life cycle of the Japanese beetle to maps of the distribution of air pollutants in the Los Angeles basin and cholera in 19th-century London. Some are as witty as the chart showing the food provisions of an ocean liner, including a 4,340-pound chicken; others as dramatic as a chart of Tufte’s own design tracking the booster-rocket problem that killed the _Challenger_ astronauts.

“I don’t want people to ever see the same way again,” he says.

Working on a research project at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications, at the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign, Tufte is moving from flatland to “movieland,” attempting to arrive at principles for making clearer the moving models—generated by computers—of complex scientific theories, from the interaction of atoms to the theoretical physicist Stephen Hawking’s theory of the universe.

One recent morning at the center, Tufte, in torn jeans and loafers, bounds downstairs into a darkened basement room where a half-dozen huge computer screens glow. He has worked most of the night and is still excited. “Wow,” he says, “I haven’t worked that late in a computer lab since I was an undergraduate.” (He went to Stanford.)

He has come here to help redesign a classic example of computer visualization, “A Study of a Numerically Modeled Severe Storm,” better known simply as “Storm.”

For two and a half hours on April 3, 1964, a thunderstorm raged across Oklahoma and Texas, spinning off a tornado that killed seven people, injured 111 and did some $15 million in damage. Now that thunderstorm—or at least its numerical ghost—surges across a computer screen, compressed by a supercomputer into a video model, six minutes long. Such models may eventually help predict the course and severity of storms and tornados.

With the help of computers named Klimt, Courbet and Mondrian, Tufte is doing here in computerland the same things he does in flatland, simplifying the design but adding layers of detail: lightening the grid across which the storm moves, adding a “tripod” scale showing distance and compass direction. “We want to increase the resolution of the space,” he says. “It’s moving, but it’s all information.”

Tufte suggests putting a “movie strip” of storm images at the bottom of the screen to function as a visual clock, to show the viewer where he is in the sequence. It uses one of his favorite ideas—small multiples. “That’s great!” he exclaims as it comes on the screen. “Wonderful. It’s just what Scheiner, Galileo’s rival, did with sunspots in 1626.”

Tufte has a copy of Christopher Scheiner’s book at home, and one of Galileo’s. Along with the Euclid, for which he paid $19,000 at Sotheby’s, they are part of what he calls his “Museum of Cognitive Art.” He draws both inspiration and examples from such books, written, he says, when “word and drawing were as one” and the image was “just another sentence element” in the argument. For all his work with computers, his ideas center around a ringing affirmation of the power of the book.

His own books are designed so that visual examples merge seamlessly with text. In _The Visual Display of Quantitative Information_ (1983) and its sequel, _Envisioning Information_, Tufte has traced the history of the discipline, showcased the best examples and formulated principles to guide future designers. The books are a collection of solutions in information design, drawing on examples from the work of unheralded pioneers like the Englishman William Playfair, whose 1786 chart traced the size of the British government debt, and Charles Joseph Minard, a French engineer whose 1869 graph-map tracking Napoleon’s 1812–13 march to and from Moscow Tufte feels “may well be the best statistical graphic ever drawn.” Tufte argues for simplifying graphics in order to make them more complex, removing unnecessary elements in order to introduce new, useful ones. He speaks of the “smallest effective difference”—the lightest line or shade or simplest shape that will do the representational job. Ideally, the design should disappear in favor of the information.

That his examples are also visually rich, colorful and intriguing in form is an indirect result. “I view aesthetics as a fortunate byproduct of the display of information,” he says. There is something Nabokovian about his approach, which mixes the scientific and the artistic, and about his language, in which the technical mingles with the metaphorical. “Ideas about information design have a wonderful scope and reach,” he says. “Such ideas are indifferent to disciplinary distinctions, indifferent to whether it is science or art.”

The principles of good design are also “indifferent to time, indifferent to space.” Tufte’s examples of good design include a Japanese spy’s copy of a Javanese railroad schedule, reproduced in _Envisioning_, and a courtroom chart given to him by John Gotti’s lawyers, Bruce Cutler and Susan Kellman, which helped lead to the reputed mobster’s acquittal in 1987. The chart listed the Government witnesses against Gotti and their own criminal activities. “Though only 37 percent of all the possible combinations are marked,” Tufte writes, “they dominate the spreadsheet grid.” Where crime and witness intersect, the mark is a powerful X. Together, the 69 bold X’s impugn the Government witnesses with all the power of an old-fashioned warning on a poison bottle.

Bad examples are easier to find than good ones. Tufte fights what he calls “chart junk”—which he defines as “content-free decoration”—and quantifies the “lie factor” of bad graphics, like those that use dollar figures without adjusting for inflation. He castigates drawings of oil barrels that exaggerate the increase in petroleum prices (the volume of the barrels increase in three dimensions, but the price in just one) and singles out as “chartoons” graphics like one that traces the price of diamonds on the bent leg of a chorus girl, using her fishnet hose as a grid.

Some practicing graphic designers see Tufte’s standards as overly academic and rigorous. _Time_’s Nigel Holmes, creator of the diamonds graph, was understandably irked when Tufte criticized it. Holmes admits his work has sometimes been exaggerated, but feels that Tufte, in his insistence on absolute mathematical fidelity, remains trapped in “the world of academia” and insensitive to “the world of commerce,” with its need to grab an audience. But even Holmes admires and admits to having been inspired by Tufte’s books.

Tufte’s rule is that any graph should have a true scale—numbers should be represented accurately by the dimensions of ink on the page, as in a map scale. He wants to add data so the viewer can personalize the image, read it his or her own way. “Detail lends credibility,” he proclaims. For the train schedules Tufte and his wife, the graphic designer Inge Druckrey, conceived for New Jersey Transit, he adapted a structure devised in 1846 by Charles Ybry, but he added high-resolution aerial photographs marked with the course of the rails. “Look,” the image invites, “you maybe able to find your own house.” To Tufte’s delight, many riders reveled in looking for their houses, but to his disappointment most found the schedule no easier to read than the previous 32-page all-type version.

To demonstrate that information design can be a life and death matter, Tufte pulls out a chart prepared by Morton-Thiokol, the maker of the space shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket boosters, relating damage to the boosters to the temperature at launch time. The design of the chart—with launches arranged according to date, not temperature—hides the fact that, as Tufte puts it, “There is all the information necessary here to have saved the _Challenger_ astronauts.” Tufte redraws the chart to make the point clear—damage had most often occurred before at low temperatures, and no launch day had been nearly as cold as the 31 degrees predicted for _Challenger_.

Tufte’s care with visuals extends to his own books. “Control of every detail of publishing,” he says, “is an extension of my means of expression.” He co-designed _The Visual Display_ with Howard Gralla and designed _Envisioning Information_ himself, using a computer. He supervised both books through the printing process, checking proofs with a magnifying glass. When the pop-up pyramid in _Envisioning_ began showing up with wrinkles, he put the original Euclid in the back of his Toyota, drove to his bookbinder in Charlestown, Mass., and showed him how the original was done. “This paper is 420 years old and hasn’t puckered yet.”

Finding that no academic or commercial publisher could produce _The Visual Display_ to his exacting standards, Tufte published it himself after taking out a $100,000 second mortgage on his house to finance it. Under the imprint “Graphics Press,” the books have now sold 150,000 copies. Graphics Press has made several million dollars and become a legend in the publishing world. _ID_ magazine gave _Envisioning_ its coveted designation of best graphic design of the year; the designer Milton Glaser, one of the judges, called it “one of the best books on graphic design ever published.”

Says Tufte, “I can’t tell you how much of a dreamlike quality there is about the work.” That ideal intellectual landscape seems to have its physical counterpart in the eight acres and house in Connecticut where Tufte and Druckrey live with their three golden retrievers. Around a swimming pool is a fence Tufte designed, which, like a trio of his own sculptures dotting the lawn, is made up of wooden beams arrayed in a pattern of diagonals reminiscent of the New Jersey train schedule design.

. . .

By afternoon in the computer room, new effects are being added to “Storm.” Klimt displays alternate typefaces for the scale. “It’s a detail, but the details accumulate,” Tufte explains. “It’s design by aggregate pickiness.” On Courbet, alternate grids are tried out. On Mondrian, Tufte watches as the storm unfolds over and over again, growing from a bead of mercury into something like a slug, then an anvil, then a delirious version of Dumbo the elephant. The storm slides above the grid, slips in front of the tripod scale. Tufte is delighted. “That’s a sweet touch!” he exclaims, “that revealing and concealing. The scale is there but it’s harmless. You know right away it’s supporting information, not primary.”

Tufte has another idea to spring on the computer programmers: he wants to add the tornado, the killer of seven, and he wants lightning: drama and flashes to punctuate and humanize the deluge of data.

Flying home that evening, his plane passes over Chicago. It is a breathtakingly clear night, at rush hour. The grid of the city glows. Lending scale are the Hancock and Sears towers, shifting in relationship to each other on the horizon, alternately concealing and revealing each other as the plane banks. Below, the solid cherry glow of taillights in a traffic jam constitutes a virtual graph of driver frustration. “Wow,” Tufte says as he leans toward the window for a better look. “Look at that resolution.”

It’s all information, after all.

(image: 10-18-91 #1_Tufte.jpg)

##### Patton notebook, October 18–31, 1991

> I can recall precisely when I first encountered Phil’s writing, because the article was “Some Pig.” The year was 1992, I had been in NYC for six years, and my hankering for the comforts of North Carolina was strong. And here was a guy who knew _exactly_ what he was talking about (eastern over western NC BBQ).

> —Russell Flinchum

(image: patton 7.jpg)

## Some Pig

### _The Village Voice,_ April 7, 1992

Drive east on Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn and, beginning just about where you see the Kentucky Fried Chicken with accordion wire on its roof, you’ll find trucks parked, selling watermelons and cantaloupes in the summer, yams and potatoes and pumpkins in the fall. You can gauge the prosperity of the adjoining neighborhoods by the decrease in the prices hand-lettered on cardboard by the drivers.

One of these drivers, many years ago, was a farmer from Magnolia, North Carolina, named George Lee. Sometimes Lee’s vegetables, which he’d leave over the weekend in a rented storage room, would be accompanied by some ham and sausage. Folks would beg—“Could I buy me a little piece of that?”—and George or his daughter Pat would cook it up on a hot plate for them.

By the beginning of the ’70s, George’s little storeroom was well known among the Tar Heel diaspora of Brooklyn. They drove up in big preowned American cars with “South of the Border” bumper stickers and lined up outside for ham sandwiches. Soon, Lee bought the building, evicted a bar, and expanded the storeroom. Thus was born the North Carolina Country Store, and, four years ago, the North Carolina Country Kitchen, across the street.

George is 73 now, still working the farm, and Pat runs the restaurant, ministering not only to the locals but to the white- and blue-collar workers from the nearby MTA facility and to those of us come specially from some distance.

You are confronted first with a variety of church supper salads, sweet and efflorescent as the corsages of the church ladies on a spring day, from simple cole slaw to an ambrosia compounded of sour cream, mandarin oranges, coconuts, and other fruit. The desserts begin up front, in a show window like a jeweler’s—pumpkin, sweet potato, pecan, and lemon meringue pies as well as an abundance of cakes—and run across the top of the counter where you are served main dishes, a constant distraction to the selection process.

There is no prejudice against the efficiencies of cafeteria style or plastic plates here. You slide your tray along a wooden rail into which has been inset the words “It’s a pleasure to serve you.” Pick from the menu with the advice of your server: Breakfast is grits and home fries, eggs, country ham, fried apples, hot sausage, sage sausage, and beef sausage. Lunch and dinner, or dinner and supper, present a solid repertory of chicken, fried or smothered; pork chops, ditto; ham; ribs; and, as the menu behind the counter formally terms the dish, “chitterling maws.” Then you mull over vegetables: collard greens, black-eyed or field peas, succotash, okra, and more. The sweet potatoes, dotted with raisins and brown-sugared, are required.

The centerpiece, however, is real Carolina pork barbecue. This is picked pig, chunk barbecue—no hint of tomato or other Western impurities. The flecks of red are pepper and the vinegar is the theme that links the varying flavors. This ’cue is brought directly from the Old North State; George Lee used to make it on the place near Magnolia, until the demand exceeded the capacity of his pit.

For those of us who grew up with barbecue every Thursday in elementary school, and whose enthusiasm for it was not dimmed even when the occasional tooth or bone showed up on our plates, this is a find. We still dream of those eastern North Carolina ’cue places where the swirling smoke from the pit and the constituting cinder blocks seemed to be the same substance, varying only in solidity. Our only regret is that Ms. Lee does not offer barbecue on buns, topped with an ice cream scoop of cole slaw, a duel of sweet and sour enjoyed in the Carolinas while driving.

Like Café des Artistes, the Country Kitchen is noted for its murals. These are outside, on cinderblock walls that embrace the grounds, and depict mules, tin-roofed country houses, fields of cotton, and the like. They are the work of Floyd Gordon, whose style lends his subject matter a romanticism that indicates it’s been a while since he pursued agricultural life of the sort he paints. Gordon “studied that wall for days before starting,” Pat Lee recalls. “But once he did start he did not hesitate for a brush stroke. He went at it 70 miles a minute for a week until he had finished.”

Inspect the murals after your meal, then cross the street, to the country store, where you encounter the sausage you ate at the restaurant, sorghum and molasses, two-yolked North Carolina eggs, and the whole line of Tom’s snack products, from pork skins to moon pies, as well as corn meal and hush puppy mixes from Bryan’s Red Heart mill, located on the Star Route, Dunn, NC. Prominently displayed is an autographed publicity card for James “Bonecrusher” Smith, the heavyweight boxer. He, too, hails from Magnolia, and we can easily imagine his training table.

Arrive on Friday or Saturday, if you can, because the truck from Magnolia, which is neatly triangulated between Raleigh, Wilmington, and Fayetteville, pulls in on Friday. A solid day lunch, complete with dessert and a postprandial compulsion to nap, ran us $25 for two.

In June, Pat Lee will open another restaurant and store in the Farmer’s Market in Jamaica, Queens. By July, she plans to open a third, at 15 West 125th Street, with an adjoining gift store “for just petite items, such as jars of molasses or bags of corn meal, all from North Carolina.”

(image: patton 6.jpg)

##### Tim Van Campen design.

## Cyber Fibers

### _Esquire,_ September 1992, p. 94

“These are the patterns of today,” says Dwight Huffman of Cyber Fyber (slogan: Floor Coverings for a Digital Nation), which adapts the images of electronic circuitry and microchips to rugs. “You know hieroglyphs, in Egypt? They were the patterns of that culture; these are the patterns of our culture.”

For years, when you walked into the office of any Silicon Valley executive of a certain rank, you would inevitably find on the wall a diagram of a microchip, computer-plotted in bright color and framed like a valuable print, its complex geometries full of detail to endlessly engage the eye. Then the Museum of Modern Art caught on: Its show, _Information Art: Diagramming Microchips_, is now on national tour. “When I saw the MoMA show,” says Huffman, “I was really freaking out.”

Huffman wasn’t the only one. Thanks to a new generation of rug and carpet weavers and designers, you can have something close to those chip maps on your floor. This is fitting, since it was the jacquard loom, with its punch-card pattern system, that inspired the invention of the IBM punch card and the computer it ran. You could call it the first computer-driven machine.

In an old Maine house that used to belong to a sea captain, Tim Van Campen designs rugs on his Mac II with Pixel-Paint Professional, Adobe Photoshop, and a Hewlett-Packard color printer. The results are then handwoven in China for Michaelian and Kohlberg. Van Campen juxtaposes complementary hues to produce what Eugene Delacroix, that well-known software expert, called “excited color.” It is the aesthetics, not the electronics, that are the key to his patterns. Van Campen plays with the programs, takes a bit of an image he likes, then reshapes and rescales it. He calls the result “compiled accidents.”

Not that something produced by a computer necessarily has to look only like the chips in that computer. In the Cyber Fyber line, Huffman turns the shapes of circuitry into echoes of Incan ornaments or the Greek border on the coffee-shop paper cup. Other rugs in the line turn sections of chips into abstractions, like architectural renderings or maps for urban redevelopment—Sim City, rendered in orange and Matissean blue and red. The swirly, lava-thick patterns of several of the Van Campen rugs look less like circuitry than like some computer-generated diagrams from chaos theory, the endpapers of old books, or atoms in a crystal, shimmering in the view of an electron microscope.

For, as Huffman notes, “these patterns are invisible to the eye. They are actually _arranged atoms_. How now is that?”

(image: patton 5a.jpg)

##### Kathy Erteman bowl.

## Spirals Are Going Around

### _Esquire,_ February 1993, p. 31

The spiral is the shape that hypnotizes, and it has hypnotized the design world. Spirals are showing up in art and in artifact, in clothing, furniture, and graphics. This ancient shape suddenly seems to be the design of the times—a comment on some current state of affairs. Budget deficits and health-care costs are always “spiraling”; spiral graphs chart the exponential rise of population and ozone depletion.

But not even a doctorate in spin equips one to sort out all the meanings here—the spiral is by nature ambiguous: Does it represent the widening gyre of a center that cannot hold or the graph of a system decaying to entropy? Is its force centrifugal or centripetal? Does it trace things spinning out of control or things collapsing in on themselves, something reaching escape velocity or someone “centering”? The spiral is as primitive as the petroglyphs of Chaco Canyon and as futuristic as the fernlike fractals of chaos theory. It’s primal stuff, right out of Joseph Campbell, old as the hills and forever Jung, gone round but come round again.

You can find it in images as diverse as the visionary painting of Gregory Von Maanen, a Vietnam veteran turned self-taught artist, or the Time Warner logo, whose coiling eye-ear icon has come to be known in-house as the IUD. To the Navajo, the spiral represented female wisdom, and it finds a place in Alessi’s new line of work by women designers, called Memory Containers. Josh Wexler of Hypnotic caps, dedicated to combining hip and hype, replaced the team logo or letter of the traditional baseball cap with a spiral.

The spiral rules the shape of Goodman &amp; Charlton’s line of furniture as well as the Suspiral chair, designed by Luigi Serafini. The spiral can be about time. Paul Ballew’s table with a spiral top sits on a base in the shape of an hourglass like a cross section of seconds seeping away.

The renovation of the Guggenheim Museum turned Frank Lloyd Wright’s great concrete curves into a virtual temple of the shape and the museum shop into a spiral boutique, offering pottery and glassware, letter openers, and a spiraling variety of other items bearing the motif. Wright’s spiral is as organic as evolution, but in the first major show since its reopening, the Guggenheim discovered the spirals of revolution. _The Great Utopia: The Russian and Soviet Avant-Garde, 1915–1932_, celebrated the spirals of Tatlin’s _Monument to the Third International_, where the shape stood for the inevitable rise of revolution, and included El Lissitzky’s _Proun Number 29_, a painting that centers on a spiral straight out of the hypnotist’s kit.

(image: patton 5b.jpg)

> When Phil wrote this story in 1993, there were no smart phones, no tablets, and no apps. He identifies an impressive number of nascent issues in the emerging field of interaction design, and with uncanny ability peers into the future of device convergence and what has now become ubiquitous computing.

> –Chee Pearlman

(image: patton 3.jpg)

##### A collaboration between Philip Davis of IDEO’s London office and Peter Spreenberg of the San Francisco one, this radio project shows a combination of expressive possibilities—the ocean liner imagery of the device refers to radio “waves”—and technological ones. 

## User Interface Design: Making Metaphors

### _I.D. Magazine_, March/April 1993, pp. 62–66

### As computers and the software that runs them become ubiquitous, the information conveyed on screens demands a face that is considerate to the user.

### As many companies are discovering, designers are the key to making the growing mass of electronic data easier to manipulate.

When Bill Moggridge sat down to the Gridcase Compass laptop he had just designed in 1982, he found himself “sucked down into an interface that was slow and infuriating.” The DOS-based system that drove the Compass was not only hard to use, it also lacked the fine forms and detailing of the computer’s titanium case. While the Compass would become the first computer to enter the Museum of Modern Art’s design collection, the design of its interface was a disaster.

Moggridge fiddled with the software and created his own fonts, which he called “Mogfonts.” But more significantly, he resolved to explore the whole area of what he called at first “softface,” the design of the computer’s software interface. After it was suggested that the term “softface” might better serve as the name of a Cabbage Patch doll, he came up with the more acceptable “interaction design.”

So Moggridge’s San Francisco–based firm, IDTwo, which later became IDEO, was one of the first firms to develop a team for interface design. Today, more and more firms are following suit as software interfaces emerge as a significant new design challenge.

#### Every object has an interface

The interface of a shovel is its handle, the interface of a lamp is its switch. But the word comes from the culture of computer technologists and, says Moggridge, “anywhere you have chips you have interface.” The design of graphical user interfaces (GUIs) ranges from the everyday workings of useful, affordable and compatible business tools to the dazzling possibilities of Virtual Reality or glittering multimedia spectacles. GUI designers work with software for personal computers, of course, but they also design displays for remote controls, fax machines, copiers and all sorts of personal, portable electronics—stopwatches, telephones, personal digital assistants, beepers, cameras and stereo equipment. Various forms of vending and service machines, from ATMs to information kiosks, require software for touch screens. Home interactive computer and television systems, such as Nintendo and CD-Interactive, and the still molten field of multimedia communications devices for the home provide challenges. “Human interface design arguably represents the most important single discipline in information technology,” computer consultant Daniel Gross of Magnetic Press in New York asserts. “It is, metaphorically speaking, where the rubber meets the road.”

Interface design has a wide constituency, even if its members don’t know it yet. Public frustration with the difficulties of operating VCRs, microwave ovens and automobile controls have helped make behavioral psychologist Donald Norman, author of _Psychology of Everyday Things_, a cultural hero celebrated in _People_ magazine. Norman is seen by many professionals, however, as stronger on criticisms than on solutions—a Ross Perot of interface problems. But he and others have tapped a deep vein of user resentment that suggests how much work lies ahead of good interface designers. That Norman has been made an Apple fellow suggests that companies are getting the message; the irony is that he has landed at the company least in need of his services.

#### A new design field?

“Interface design is where industrial design was in the ’30s,” believes Doris Wells-Papanek, director of “human interface” design at Apple’s Development Tools Engineering section. Wells-Papanek’s is a sentiment you hear many younger designers echo and one that design schools are beginning to heed. At Art Center in Pasadena, Robert Henniger, who heads up a new interface design program, claims that “over the last year the admissions office has gotten some 600 calls for a program like this.” Ohio State, Stanford and ITT’s Institute of Design also offer programs in this fledgling field.

For all the talk of “personalizing” products, designers and manufacturers are still getting used to the idea that a “user interface shell” can be as dramatic as the shell of a 1940s radio, a UNIX “front end” as personable as that of a Miata, or that the dizzying graphic variety of the media can offer the marketing cachet of “outback beige” or “sport yellow.” Sue Booker, a veteran of IDTwo and Apple, who recently established her own firm specializing in interface design, sees the day when software will give products definition, personality and variety. “It’s easier and cheaper to change the interface than the hardware,” Booker points out. “If you can’t afford to retool, change the interface.”

#### Many (inter)faces

So far, designers who take on interface problems have found that the work they do varies widely. Clients of IDEO’s interaction group have included Unisys, Tandem and Metaphor computers and Claris software. The company has been involved in creating interfaces for medical monitors, a nautical navigation device for Trimble navigation and a ski watch/altimeter with large buttons for glove wearers. “For a while, we had a lot of clients from the medical world,” says Peter Spreenberg of IDEO, “but lately it’s interactive television.”

Designers John Rheinfrank, Shelley Evenson and Wendie Wulff of Fitch, Richardson Smith’s Exploratory Design Lab have pioneered ways of developing methodology for designing interfaces. (One of their approaches, called “Animating Interfaces,” won a 1991 I.D. Annual Design Review award.) Henry Dreyfuss Associates in New York, building on its work designing controls for machinery for such clients as John Deere, has begun an interface design department. The firm’s work has included systems as varied as one for restaurant reservation and seating and another to control an agricultural irrigation system.

In San Francisco, designer Clement Mok, who was on the original Macintosh team, says his firm now combines interface design, including multimedia and CD-ROM, with package design in their marketing work. For Wolverine Inc., a company that produces a wide variety of housing exterior products, Mok’s firm created a showroom interface in which homeowners can select a house pattern representative of their own—Victorian, bungalow, etc.—then change the colors of the shutters or siding by clicking on a menu of hues. “You can make really ugly houses,” Mok says wryly.

The day Moggridge sat down to his Gridcase could be said to mark the arrival of a new era. By the 1960s, the rise of the electronic “black box” shifted focus from the shapes of many products to the physical or electronic controls, a shift symbolized by the reticence of simple slab stereo components or Richard Sapper’s black cube of a television set for Brion Vega. The shift in focus also cast existing ideas of “design language” and “product semantics” in another light, at once literalizing and abstracting them. But when dealing with computers the designer’s work on the black box can be undercut by the failings of the images that appear on the screen. It was with the concern in mind that Moggridge’s firm began to investigate the possibilities of adding graphics to the user interface.

#### The interface aesthetic

The GUIs we frequently encounter today are based on the Star computer developed at Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Company. Xerox PARC exported the word “interface” from behind the closed doors of computer technicians. Talk to interface designers today and they still list pioneers such as Norm Cox and Stuart Card of Xerox PARC as important influences. Wells-Papanek and Booker are themselves PARC veterans. The graphical interfaces of the operating system for the Macintosh, Microsoft Windows, IBM’s OS/2, and GUIs for UNIX systems, have marked the convergence of computer operating systems toward a single concept, albeit with many varieties and many levels of quality, all carrying the genes of PARC.

The so-called “desktop metaphor” of the PARC GUI, with its icons, windows, trompe l’oeil buttons and shadows has provided a useful group of conventions and metaphors: on-screen devices such as sliders, buttons in all their variety, windows and icons. Almost all GUIs share functional similarity and the same strengths and weaknesses. The best of these GUIs offer multiple reinforcements of “intuitive” ways of doing things—the hand’s muscle memory seconds the eye’s visual memory.

There is still a lot of room for improvement in the appearance of GUIs. The mechanics of icons and windows can grow cumbersome and distracting. Edward Tufte, the respected author of _The Visual Display of Quantitative Information_ and _Envisioning Information_, was hired by IBM as a special design consultant. Joining Paul Rand, Richard Sapper and Eliot Noyes as one of a handful in such a role, Tufte’s task was to produce a series of elegant interface guidelines in which standards of color and typeface were equal to that found in books and maps. He advocated the thinning of window lines, “degridding” to remove unnecessary clutter and suggested the use of pale yellow as an appropriate hue for delimiting spaces in the limited palette of computer monitors. Tufte recognized the problems inherent in current screens and GUIs: narrow bandwidth, jumpiness of windowing environments, continuing reliance on visual memory and data presentations he wryly compared to the cartoon view of history. “It’s just one damn thing after another,” Tufte said. Seeking the “transparent” on-screen graphics that Tufte suggested, IBM has worked to thin its user interface to make it less obtrusive with paler hues and finer lines in the new version of OS/2. Work on icons and windows at the pixel level, avoiding what Tufte calls “1+1=3” interference effects, can vastly improve the look of the desktop.

Another design issue that needs to be addressed with interface is the importance of icon design. For instance, when Claris went to IDEO to shape the interface for MacWrite 2 and other programs, what it sought amounted to a corporate identity program, giving Claris icons a recognizable, common style. But as their numbers increase, icons can also become as cryptic and confusing as file names, creating baffling hieroglyphics. Mok believes they are often overused. “We are iconed to hell,” he says. For one company, Mok “de-iconed” a confusing software interface. Wells-Papanek says that Apple tries to develop a “sentence” for each of its icons, including words from a vocabulary of already familiar icons—books, folders, pens and so on.

#### The importance of teamwork

IDEO has worked to push the limits of GUI and develop variants appropriate to specific projects. More important than the model, however, is the methodology. At IDEO, says Peter Spreenberg, the interaction group uses flow diagrams and preliminary “soft models” that correspond to the drawings, and foam models of physical products. Ideally, software and hardware design are done by the same team so that simple correlations between hardware and software, such as physical function keys lining up with legends on the screen, can occur.

Most designers emphasize the need for a team approach—graphic designers, behavioral psychologists, programmers and engineers all working together. This is the approach at Apple, where a new book of interface standards, thick and sober, is being issued. Another focus is on creating standardized interface development tools. Wells-Papanek’s emphasis in the systems development division at Apple is on creating a high level of interface design in order to transfer it to user software. At Fitch RS, Rheinfrank, Wulff and Evenson have suggested a sort of visual alphabet to simplify multimedia interface design, and their “Animating Interfaces” guidelines prescribe a development process involving sketching, acting and gesture.

Moggridge is concerned that these kind of design guidelines for operating system GUIs—Macintosh, Windows and UNIX versions—will likely become a fixed quantity until some new breakthrough happens in technology, simply because of the value of compatibility. But there are dangers to overdoing and over-standardizing GUI while its form is still evolving. While it may be tempting to seek some common iconographic standards—like the buttons of tape players—designers resist the idea. “It’s too soon to standardize,” says Sue Booker. Doris Wells-Papanek feels similarly. She advocates guidelines instead of restrictive standards and offers the idea of “drivability” (the reference, of course, is to the way various car dashboards can vary and yet, by sharing elements, be easy to learn).

#### Mixing metaphors

Much interface design work has been aimed at improving the tools on the desktop with “stacks” or “piles.” While at IDTwo, Sue Booker suggested a variant: an electronic bulletin board, complete with trompe l’oeil pushpins, for Xerox. But the idea of objects on a desk is not a universal answer for all software. Says Wells-Papanek, “The world is not the office,” and transplanting the desktop metaphor is not always the solution.

Interface designers like to talk of “new paradigms” or “new metaphors.” Apple’s Newton takes the idea of “electronic paper” and rolls it into a “scroll,” a continuous sheet of electronic paper from which the user “tears off” pieces. Office supplies, such as the electronic notebook, complete with tabs, page numbers and personalized stationery, serve as the ruling metaphor in Go Inc.’s PenPoint software. The “electronic cocktail napkin,” as envisioned by Notable software’s David Larson, is the model for his company’s Shared Whiteboard, a program that allows users of a pen-based computers to collaborate on a sketch, long distance, in real time.

Clement Mok is looking at the rhetoric of television and film as a guide for multimedia projects: “Film and signage—it’s a hybrid.” Graphic traditions inform “fixed points” while, in between, the model of the script determines the pace and structure of the presentation. Mok finds the user demands personality and a narrator’s voice—“a voice of God” he jokingly calls it. Some software developers project that that voice will come in the form of electronic “agents” or “actors”; Electronic Arts’ Trip Hawkins calls them “Sprites” that carry out tasks independently of the user.

Other new metaphors for graphic interfaces take off in three dimensions, disappearing through windows and flying over landscapes. Muriel Cooper of the MIT Media Lab’s Visual Language Lab notes that while we call open boxes on a screen “windows,” “you can’t see through them—they are really electronic pieces of paper.” Is there a metaphor for opening the window—turning it into a door, perhaps, or into a room, a house, even a town, with hardware store and software store on its Main Street? There is a widespread desire among designers to deepen the screen with something more than vestigial shadows. For example, IDEO created a sense of depth in software designed for Metaphor, a blue to gray “sky” appears on the screen and icons trail “smoke” when they are moved.

The representation of 3-D space as an architectural metaphor is apparent in the interfaces of some video games and CD-Interactive programs where users move from “room to room” along virtual hallways or as guided by an on-screen map. As personal computers and networks become more capable of processing complex models, why shouldn’t business applications also employ our inherent sense of architectural space to help workers navigate through complex webs of electronic information?

To move in this direction, designers are taking note of another Xerox PARC innovation, the 3-D Information Visualizer, in which database searches hover in Virtual Reality in “cones and trees of inquiry” displayed on a wall-sized screen. It is already serving as model for a new category of Virtual Reality interfaces applied to “information landscapes.” Such interfaces await the attentions of professional designers. Our current notions of Virtual Reality interfaces are colored by applications such as video games and interactive architectural models. Bill Moggridge believes that this prevailing view of VR is unfortunate; the emphasis, he argues, should be on the “Virtual,” not on the “Reality.” Detail and photorealistic resolution is far less important than the creation of 3-D space and real-time interactions that allow the user to feel immersed in the task on screen.

#### Other senses and places

The computer’s constantly improving ability to recognize handwriting and voice carries design into a wholly new realm, a misty, multisensory world. Keyboard, mouse, joystick, pen, voice and touch raise questions as to which sense and inputs are most appropriate to which tasks. Ordinary automated switchboards and voice-mail systems involve design at a level rarely associated with product design. How these items are used suggests the kind of problems voice systems of all types may face. The electronic simulation of touch lies on the technology horizon as well. Sue Booker is interested in using multiple senses on devices, especially those intended for use by the handicapped. Temperature, vibration and other tactile qualities could help the sighted as well as the blind.

The psychological and social issues raised by interfaces are fundamental and profound. Which senses are appropriate to which devices? To what extent should interface provide personality? How much flexibility should individuals be given to customize interfaces? Asks Shelley Evenson, “When you are connected through networks at home, how do you know you are in an organization? What happens to your sense of place? This involves a radical rethinking of corporate identity.” This need to define a sense of space within a computer interface is seen by some as the paradigm.

As Xerox PARC provided GUI more than a decade ago, many are looking with interest to its latest innovations, particularly what it terms “ubiquitous computing,” in which computing devices become “electronic Post-It notes,” picked up anywhere; the computer merges with the desk and walls. Personal digital assistants and similar devices may take ubiquitous computing a step farther. If, like EO and Newton, they can tie into cellular phone systems or satellites to communicate with distant computers, phones, fax machines and so forth, they will make computing ubiquitous by definition.

“A lot of us who got involved in this in 1987,” Mok says, “have come full circle.” The once glittering possibilities of hypermedia, the dizzying forests of hypertext, are shaded by experience. “People like to have a guide in life,” Mok says. He hints at a return to narrative—the supremacy of story and tale—as metaphor for interaction. “What I’m reading now,” he says, “is Joseph Campbell. Those familiar with folkloric trackings of classical myth in _Star Wars_ can understand the connection: tale transcends technology.”

> Phil’s ode to the Sears, Roebuck catalogue memorializes its central role in America’s material culture. His insight always goes beyond the object to an understanding of its broadest sociological context.

> –Chee Pearlman

(image: patton 17.jpg)

##### The catalogue sold everything, from dresses to steel-belted radials.

## The Big Book: Put Out to Pasture

### _I.D. Magazine_, May/June 1993, p. 21

The Big Book, the Wish Book, the Dream Book—the Sears, Roebuck catalogue is gone, and with it a part of the traditional core of American culture. Its end is a token of the fragmentation of the common American market. Replaced at one end of the economic spectrum by Wal-Mart and K-Mart and at the other by boutique catalogues and chains strung from mall to mall, it has been ailing for years, says retail analyst Kurt Barnard. Montgomery Ward gave up on it a decade ago. It was dead, as the saying goes, but too dumb to lie down—until now.

The Dream Book figured in innumerable tales of rural childhoods. It was the catalogue to the big show of American life, and with its multiple variants of hats and corsets, it celebrated the triumph of marginal differentiation. It reflected the solid core of American life—a realm of Dutch ovens and bib overalls, Raymond Loewy’s Coldspot refrigerators, kit houses and even, briefly, automobiles—but also its eccentricities and tragic flaws, offering electric reducing belts and “darkey” toys.

But it was more: a reading primer, a de facto encyclopedia, an inventory of the wide, wide world. It is more than legend that in rural privies it served double function: read a page, then tear it out.

Losing the big catalogue is like losing Cronkite or Carson, John Wayne or Ed Sullivan. It signals a loss of common ground, of community—if only what Daniel Boorstin called a “consumption community” that at its peak numbered some 15 million, or nearly 10 percent of the population. Its demise is a symbol of the centrifugal forces of economic and cultural diversity.

The early catalogue’s deadpan black and white—the company used woodcuts long after other media had abandoned them—survives in a few no-nonsense publications. To contemplate the variety of shapes and sizes of printer and typewriter ribbon in stationery supply catalogues is to be confronted with mini Arps and Brancusis. But we also fondly recall the soft color of later editions, and think of Ted Williams loaded for pheasant or wadered for trout, standing 10 feet in front of a painted autumn hillside, in the guns and sporting equipment section.

FDR famously advocated dropping Sears catalogues on the Soviet Union as the best way to fight Communism. Perhaps one can say it worked, but with unexpected results. Russian émigré designer Constantin Boym was so taken with Sears that he created a whole line of “Sears style” furniture, mixing and matching seats, backs and so on from the kit of available parts in the catalogue. “What will I do now?” he laments. His “Sears Style” was an implicit reading, fascinated and bemused, of the catalogue an its take on American life.

Other readings are as numerous as dream readings. To some, what it possessed of the dream was strangeness, an incidentally surrealist miscellany of objects and randomness of juxtapositions. Duchamp compared his _Large Glass_ to the Sears catalogue. While he was putting together the Museum of Modern Art’s _High &amp; Low_ show, which juxtaposed pages from the catalogue with surrealist collages, curator Kirk Varnedoe noted that “one man looks at a Sears, Roebuck catalogue and sees a total deadpan inventory, while another sees a hallucinatory fantasy of corsets running together with tractors.”

If the catalogues grew up on the railroads, they achieved their ultimate penetration into the markets at the ends of dirt roads, up in the hollow and down in the bayou by virtue of free rural delivery. Enjoying Federal Express, decrying the Postal Service, we forget this vital plank of the populist program, whose legacy is symbolized by millions of round-backed, galvanized-steel mailboxes. The planning and charting of RFD routes for mule or Model-T was an infrastructure development at once mundane and profound in its effects on individual lives. Faulkner offers us a Yoknapatawpha character named Montgomery Ward Snopes.

There’s much talk of virtual companies these days: the catalogue was the virtual department store. The little catalogues are the virtual shopping center: the mall, the mail. Sears depended on Railroad Express; they use Federal Express.

In the week after Sears announced the end of the catalogue, we received the following: Hanna Anderson, for children; J. Crew; Smith &amp; Hawken; Aero Books International; DAK for electronics buffs; and the J. Peterman “User’s Manual,” with its rough watercolor sketches and evocative copy. With the Peterman catalogue the Wish Book moves beyond McLuhan—your imagination fills in the gaps to create the product you dream of and wish for. The catalogue is dead; long live the catalogues.

> Phil came into my office one day with a paper sack of coffee-cup lids and dumped them on my desk. By the end of the meeting, we had the cover feature of our next issue. In my Editor’s Note, I wrote: “This is the kind of story we love most—the chance to reveal the design passion and invention devoted to the most prosaic of things.”

> —Chee Pearlman

(image: patton 18.jpg)

## Top This: Coffee-Cup Lids

### _I.D. Magazine_, May/June 1996, pp. 40–47 Photography by James Wojcik

### Uncovering the design intricacies beneath the humble coffee-cup lid: from pasteboard to polystyrene, and from cup of joe to cappuccino

Like most Americans, I spend a lot of time on the road and drink a lot of coffee while I’m there. Driving in our cars and trucks, we sip thick espresso or our watery truck-stop java. But the trend is not new. As early as de Tocqueville, foreign observers noted our national obsessions with mobility and caffeine.

The tokens of these twinned obsessions are thin white discs—the lids of our coffee cups, carefully designed for sipping on the move. I have long been a heavy consumer of these lids. Now I am also a connoisseur of them.

It began by chance, thanks to sloppiness. Lids began to pile up on my car floor. Gathering them up one day in an unaccustomed fit of neatness, I noticed how many varieties there were, and how complex the combination of instructions and indications on them, how various and intricate the devices for opening and locking back flaps—in short, how intensely _designed_ they were.

Rolled out of polystyrene sheets, carefully crimped for strength, folded and lapped to fit snugly, scored and sculpted to provide flaps that come loose and hook so we can sip on the go, coffee lids are coinage of our sped-up society.

(image: patton 20a.jpg)

##### McDonald’s lid: Some fast-food chains have customized lids stamped with their names. This costs only fractions of a penny per lid, but those pennies add up rapidly when multiplied by hundreds of thousands of copies. McDonald’s stamps its arches and Wendy’s stamps its name and logo, but Burger King does not. McDonald’s also has the only lid we’ve encountered with Braille markings (for “decaf” and “other”). We also appreciate the little steam and overflow chimney, with its trio of collecting pools at the base.

(image: patton 20a.jpg)

##### Solo Traveler: The brainchild of Jack Clements of Ada, Oklahoma, the Traveler was designed to accommodate the nose and the lip of the drinker but turned out to be useful for foam-topped gourmet coffees. Clements also received a design patent for the lid’s “decorative” elements.

(image: patton 20a.jpg)

##### Sweetheart Gourmet: Sweetheart’s answer to the success of the Solo Traveler. Softer and less complicated in shape than earlier lids, it replaces a flap with a sip chamber and dome.

They are also testimony to the way we Americans differ from the rest of the world.

To Europeans, who often mock our demands for cup holders in our cars, the design energy spent on coffee-cup lids may seem disproportionate to their importance. But by best estimates—and none of the industry groups I queried could give an exact figure—we use about a billion and half lids each year.

Their variety and ingenuity is a classic example of capitalist efflorescence: their makers range from giant corporations that also make cups and plates, to “short liners” whose margins are as thin as the polystyrene they use.

Rippled, folded, beaded, crenellated, these discs grow fascinating on study. I decided to see how many I could assemble and was surprised when the dozen or so variants I expected turned into two dozen, then three. As my collection grew, so did my interest. As I spotted people with cups from familiar chains, I found myself leaning over their shoulders to see what kind of lids Timothy’s or Gloria Jean’s uses.

Confiding this secret interest in coffee lids to friends and acquaintances would often elicit strange looks. But a surprising number people had also noticed these objects. (After all, they are constantly lifting them up to their faces.) One designer recalled how in the primitive days of lids, before sip tabs, it was a badge of skill to be able to neatly tear out a space for sipping.

If you look at them without touching or lifting, lids can seem as stately as sculpted plaster or marble, like little medallions, even mock cameos. But pick them up and their weight—no more than a fraction of an ounce—deflates their aspirations to dignity. They are disposable in feel as well as function.

The purpose of most lids is not just to keep coffee from spilling or cooling during transportation, but also to enable drinking while at the wheel, on the train or even walking. There are several basic types of lid, I quickly learned: the simple vented model, with an aperture to let steam escape; the lock-back, with a sipping aperture and a piece of plastic that can be folded back out of the way; and the gourmet, for lattes or cappuccinos. They often bear the triangulated arrows of recycling marks and the number six (the Society of Plastics Industries designation for polystyrene that can be, but rarely is, recycled to make other plastic objects).

The more I looked, the more differences of detail I noted: on one flap, the words “fold back” are readable only from the bottom (or from the top in reverse, the way “ambulance” is lettered on the front for the benefit of drivers scanning their rearview mirrors). Almost all lids are marked with letters like “C,” “C&amp;S” and “D” so the server can indicate cream, cream and sugar or decaf, and many lids feature dimples to be pushed down for the same purpose. And more and more these days, the lids are stamped with a warning that the liquid beneath is hot. These messages seem to have been prompted by a number of lawsuits including a famous one against McDonald’s by a patron who claimed to have burned herself on an excessively hot beverage. (McDonald’s lids bear such warnings, and some of its more petulant coffee cups shout “Contents hot” and “HOT!” seven times around their circumference.)

When you stop to consider the coffee lid, you become aware of the whole vast machinery of modern culture. Every day, people in fields such as material engineering, marketing, advertising and design address themselves to this—and thousands of other—most mundane and quotidian of objects. Like so many products in our society, lids are created by organizations to which we give little thought and about which we know little, companies with names like Solo, Sweetheart, Dart and Dixie.

This anonymity is intentional. These companies are largely privately owned, and they do not report total sales even to their trade organizations, groups such as the Polystyrene Packaging Council and the Flexible Packaging Association. The engineers and designers are singularly close-mouthed, as I learned when I approached them with questions about their products. In the solemn tones of a State Department spokesperson, they said such things as “I don’t think it would be appropriate for us to discuss our design methods.”

At last, I found Michael Smith, a thoughtful and articulate man in Sweetheart’s marketing department who was willing to give me a capsule history of the coffee lid. It is not a very long one. In the 1960s, the best thing you could get to top your cup was a disk of pasteboard with a small tongue-shaped grip, like those still used on cups of ice cream. The plastic lid that fits around the rim of a cup is a fairly recent invention, and did not become widespread until the second half of the 1970s. Although there doesn’t seem to be an official historian of this particular artifact, anecdotal evidence and a look at patent records suggests a clear narrative.

(image: patton 19a.jpg)

##### Such details as the initials indicating cream and sugar on Sweetheart’s Spider are recorded in patent drawings.

(image: patton 20b.jpg)

##### The patent drawings for the Solo Traveler (above and right) emphasize its ergonomic design.

The first lids were simple disks often reinforced by concentric rings. During the early ’80s, they gradually acquired perforations to allow a bite-shaped or guitar pick–shaped bit of plastic to be removed for drinking on the move. Various means of locking back this tab were devised, using notches and flaps, posts and sockets. There were even design patents filed on certain decorative elements of coffee lids, such as one with decorative disks on its rim.

(image: patton 20b-2.jpg)

Many of the sipping areas relied on tear-through scores that were hard to produce with predictable quality. A “spider” design for Sweetheart, devised by Thomas Winstead, does away with scoring and claims to let you remove a piece of the lid for sipping, then replace it. It sounds good in the patent description, but in practice I found this “replaceable” half moon to be a cruel illusion. Try to slip it back over the rim of the cup and it slips off or sinks into the hole.

Then came the gourmet revolution. From the epicenter of Seattle, beginning two or three years ago, such chains as Starbucks, Gloria Jean’s, Timothy’s and others began to purvey coffee drinks topped with foamy milk, requiring a new kind of lid. Solo found itself in the happy position of offering the only dome lid design that served to protect the foam of lattes and cappuccinos.

That was not its original purpose, however. The Solo Traveler, which relied on a patent filed by Jack Clements of Ada, Oklahoma, had been sculpted to provide an area for the drinker’s lip and nose by raising the level of the lid above the cup. The lid also offered a kind of overflow reservoir. This raised shape served very well to protect the foam. The Traveler is one of the few lids that not only claims patent protection, but prints the patent number—4589569—on the lid.

Solo soon locked up the business of Starbucks and found itself in a position to challenge market leader Sweetheart. But in the world of coffee lids, leadership can be short-lived. Thrown on its heels, Sweetheart put together an effort to match Solo without violating its patents. An engineer named Al Bibeau and other designers at Sweetheart’s Owings Mill, Maryland, factory and engineering center responded with the lid trademarked “Gourmet,” which is only now being rolled out across the country. The most visually elegant of lids, it resembles an architect’s model for a modern civic arena, with a gently angled, curving lid.

In its effort to beat Solo, Sweetheart added some new features. The opening for sipping is set on a raised ridge, and the literature points out the “plug type lid seat,” and the often overlooked stacking ring for nesting cups—for those occasions when you bring coffee back to the office. And the Gourmet offers something else new: the model for sixteen-ounce cups also fits ten- and twenty-ounce ones, meaning fewer items for a company to stock in its inventory.

(image: patton 21b.jpg)

##### Another design by Jack Clements for Solo offers a recess for “engagement by a finger in an automatic vending machine.”

The Gourmet is the Cadillac of Sweetheart’s line of lids, which move upward in cost and sophistication from the simple vented to the sip to the lock-back before reaching Gourmet. Its sales literature boasts of the Gourmet: “The upscale look and the modern design of this lid is ideally suited for serving gourmet coffee. Customers appreciate the form, the function . . . and the shop that features it.”

After several frustrating attempts to pry design information out of the lid makers, I hit pay dirt with the patent records, the place where the engineers must publish the trade secrets they guard so zealously.

There is a dizzying wealth of patents for beverage lids. As crisp and carefully turned as a lid itself, the prose of the patent claims is suffuse with a bright white light of literalness and legality. There is talk of “the prior art” and of tabs and posts and sockets that “frictionally engage.” But occasionally more prosaic and human justifications of design features break through: This lid is good for “drinking with one hand”; that one claims “less harsh lip feel.”

After running a search on the Commerce Department’s World Wide Web patent sections, I learned I could not download the drawings. To get them, I tromped to Room 150 of the New York Public Library, fighting potholes and construction diversion that jolted the coffee cup in my hand, filling the reservoir in my cup lid.

At the library, I found the information infrastructure as decrepit as the transportation one. I wrestled with ancient computers and microfilm machines that barely worked, copiers that would accept only dimes and a change machine that was exceedingly fussy about wrinkled bills. Finally I hit gold: the original Solo Traveler patent. Another trip to the change machine, another frayed bill rejected.

It occurred to me on the trip back to the Patent Room that what appeals about cup lids is the neat way in which they dispose of a problem—a small problem, to be sure—while the world around them remains ragged and uncertain. A lid that works is a small raft of functional mercy in the stormy sea of computer incompatibility, panty-hose runs, dead batteries, construction zones, traffic jams and unprogrammable VCRs that is modern life.

On the way out of the room, something caught my eye with a white flash. In the wastebasket beside the librarian’s desk, floating atop a pile of crumpled papers, lightly stained with remnants of brown coffee, was a specimen of Jack Clements’s invention, the very device whose Ur-gestalt I had just been viewing on the microfilm reader: the Solo Traveler.

> All design was fodder for the “Typologies” course Phil taught in the Design Criticism graduate program at the School of Visual Arts. I was his teaching assistant and delighted in our chats about the design of the most quotidian objects, like money.

> —Molly Fulghum Heintz

(image: euro.jpg)

## Dead Eurocrats: The Colorlessness of the European Community’s Money

### _Slate_, February 27, 1997

Printed money, like the government budgets behind it, is conceived in optimism, if not in fantasy. The very designs on the bills—such as the fortresslike Treasury that appears on our $10 note—seem to promise a happy future of redemption amid prosperity. The bills aren’t called promissory notes for nothing. What they promise is a flush till.

In this time-honored spirit, the new designs for the uniform currency of the European Community offer beguiling visions of unity and wealth, of responsible fiscal practice and thriving trade. Revealed last December and slated to go into use across the continent in a few years, these notes herald nothing less than a new and nobly unified Europe.

But for all their color and utopian promise, the new notes are lifeless. After all, coinage and currency usually reflect the character of the issuing state, and in this case the state is largely bureaucratic. The European Monetary Institution in Frankfurt, which under the 1991 Maastricht Treaty is charged with making the new Eurodollar, is described in its own literature as “an organization of the European Union, with legal personality.” “Legal personality” is right on the mark. This is money designed not by bureaucrats but by Eurocrats, an all-star team of international paper-pushers.

Everything about the new currency is vintage Eurocrat. Its name, the euro, was picked because it translates easily into almost every member country’s language. Only Greek, with its own native alphabet, requires a second rendering of the name on the bill. Its counterfeitproof construction—which includes the use of unreproducible holographs—attests to the businesslike thought of its designers. And the decision to cut each of the seven notes in a different size (as well as a different color), to help the visually impaired, reveals the practical- minded Eurocrats’ more considerate side.

The specifications laid out for the look of the new bank notes by the institution are as tortuously legalistic as the notorious specs issued in Brussels, the seat of the new Eurocracy, to regulate intracontinental trade. (The Brussels rules fastidiously prescribe every detail of what can and cannot be sold within the European economic community, yielding such creations as the Euroapple, already infamous in the orchards of Wye, Westfalia, and everywhere else that fruit cultivated for centuries has been found not to make the grade.) Back in June 1995, the European Monetary Institution set up committees to choose possible “themes” for the designs, settling at last on two: a historical one, the “ages and styles” of Europe; and a geometrical one, “abstract modern.” These themes were broad enough to encompass almost anything individual designers could come up with. What they ruled out were portraits of people, especially portraits of leaders. Individuals inevitably raise the specter of nationalism. No dead presidents here.

The institution next held a competition, inviting design teams from the central banks of the various member nations to enter. Thirtysome entries flowed in, for consideration by a jury of 14 experts whose diverse national and professional backgrounds rivaled even the crew of _Star Trek_—ranging from Baron Philippe Robert-Jones, art historian and permanent secretary of the Academie Royale des Sciences, des Lettres et des Beaux-arts de Belgique in Brussels, to Guido Crapanzano, rector of the Istituto di Scienze della Comunicazione in Milan. Last July the jury picked a winner, although it has kept the creators’ identities unpublicized in the interest of future continental unity.

The winning designer went for the “ages and styles” theme, interpreted as such stock architectural elements as bridges, windows, and gateways. The eight ages in which these bridges, windows, and gateways appear are Classical, Romanesque, Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque, and Rococo, the age of iron and glass architecture, and the age of modern architecture. The colors are muted and staid, the illustrations as innocuous, impeccable, and dispassionate as those you would find in an economics textbook.

They’re also supposed to have symbolic meaning. The windows and gates represent the spirit of openness and cooperation of the new confederation, we are told, while the bridge is a metaphor, as Bill Clinton showed, guaranteed not to go over the heads of the populace of any continent. More specifically, according to the literature, the bridge “epitomizes the dawn of the new common Europe with its common cultural heritage and the vision of a common future in the next century, indeed, the new millennium.” These are not, mind you, actual existing bridges, like London Bridge or the Pont Neuf, but are “generic, and cannot be attributed to any particular place in any single country.”

The result is an entire landscape of the generic—a place that is never France or Germany but always just Europe, as it might figure in landscapes chosen for American travel ads. Looking at them, you try to conjure up the people whose wallets these bills will inhabit, the new race of Europeans who will have no English umbrellas, French berets, or German bellies. It is not easy.

These notes, cool and considered, may make more practical sense than our greenbacks, with their wacky eye on the pyramid swiped from Masonic lore and the Model T–era automobile that still putts along in front of the Treasury building. But will they ever really circulate? According to the Maastricht Treaty, the currency will be put into circulation only after individual national economies have hit certain “targets”—such as a sufficiently low ratio of debt to gross domestic product. But these targets still seem far out of reach. Germany, which has the largest economy and the strongest currency in the group, was supposed to lead the way, but recently German unemployment has jumped to levels not seen since the Weimar Republic, and the mark is softening.

The European Monetary Institution promises that it will announce within the next two years the exact date on which the euros will go into use. It’s supposed to be no later than Jan. 1, 2002. Not until then will we know whether this is real money or funny money—whether it will be worth a continental.

> When I learned that Phil was an authority on the American road I thought we must do a book on the topic. I took my holidays that year in Washington’s Digital Photography Collection of the National Archives and visited Phil together with the young graphic designer Olaf Meyer (who did the book, which became a _Gesamtkunstwerk_). He invited us to the diner just around the corner from his place. That’s actually where the two of us had our last supper, when we saw each other last time. Phil was smart as ever.

> —Bernd Polster

(image: generalstore-highway60-x20[1].jpg)

##### Cigarettes, food and ammunition. General store on Highway 60. Datil Mountains, New Mexico.

## Road to Nowhere

### _Highway. America’s Endless Dream_, New York, 1997_, pp. 32–35 (excerpted essay)_

Interstates/inner states: It’s the right pun. The name of America’s superhighway system suggests connections, but the effect of the system is to foster and convey all sorts of individual and collective emotions. It is the nervous system of the body politic, the body economic, the body cultural. “Oh Public Road,” Whitman intoned long before the first cloverleaf sprouted among the leaves of grass, “you express me better than I can express myself!”

In America, the driver between political states is also the driver between states of mind. Those who drive are often alone, often between, lives. They are abandoning old identities and looking for new ones, but are most themselves in the interval. Some drive to remember, others to forget.

We speak of the American “way” of life, not the American “form” of life. As John Steinbeck wrote of the Okies: “The highway was their home, and movement their means of expression.”

. . .

According to American music, constant travel and living on the road can also become an intoxication, an addiction heard in Merle Haggard’s _White Line Fever_, in which he sings “the years keep flying by like high line poles.”

Fever or calm—both live on the American highway. There’s a peace on the road, a sense of self containment in one’s cockpit that the hours of driving bring on. The truckers become your friends, and as dusk settles and their long metal trailers begin to go soft in the headlights that ignite their quilted and damascened skins, the big rectangles seem light and airy as foil. The red lights along their length become festive and happy. Sometimes, you will pass a long line of trucks parked, their drivers sleeping, their lights lit, so they seem a carnival caravan paused en route to the next show.

The most celebrated road in America, the one closest to the American heart, is Woody Guthrie and John Steinbeck’s Route 66, but the closest to the American soul is Robert Johnson and Elmore James’s Highway 61, the road of escape, the road from agriculture to industry, from the South to the North, the primitive to the civilized.

Highway 61 runs from Jackson Square in New Orleans (once site of a slave market) north through Vicksburg, Memphis, St. Louis and on to Canada. Sixty-one is a road of opportunity too, but a different one: it represents a road of escape for African Americans from the Mississippi Delta and sharecropping to factory work in the North, in Chicago and Detroit. Highway 61 crosses Highway 49 in Clarksdale, Mississippi—the center of blues culture—to form the most famous crossroads in the area. It also bears the heavy freight of the meaning of the blues, derived from hoodoo and African legend. The blues is obsessed with the highway—from _Big Road Blues_ to _Down the Dirt Road Blues_ to _Key to the Highway_. (The joke here is that even a poor sharecropper needs no key to the highway, for this is not the king’s but the people’s highway, requiring not even the car key but simply a bus ticket or just a hitchhiker’s thumb to ride.)

The song touches on the democratic, open nature of the American road, right up to the superhighways. In Europe, the fast and slow lanes represent a virtual first and second class system of automobiles, echoing that of the railroad. Slower, cheaper cars give way to faster ones. But just as America abandoned rail classes, it also left any driver to choose any lane—an often maddening experience for the driver stuck behind the dawdling economy car in the passing lane.

Highway 61 carried Elvis and Ike Turner to Memphis, it took Muddy Waters and Elmore James north to Chicago, where they learned to plug their guitars in to electricity—and their music into the main cultural power grid of America. And 61 is the highway of the bluesman who deals with the devil and flees “the hellhound on his trail.”

The blues highway ends in _Crossroads Blues_, and in Robert Johnson’s sung request to be buried by the side of the highway, so his old evil spirit can “take a Greyhound bus and ride.” As the destination for his imaginary rides, Johnson combines “sweet home Chicago” with the magic land of California toward which 66 runs. (The geography is strictly symbolic in his lyrics.) What made Highway 61 different is that it ran in both directions spiritually as well; north toward freedom, and south toward discovery, to inspire people like Bob Dylan-who grew up as Robert Zimmerman a few miles from 61 in Minnesota—to write _Highway 61 Revisited_. Highway 61 is a darker vision of America, the cultural crossroads (wholly theoretical, since their pavements never actually merge) where 61 meets 66.

Or does the blues highway end in Aretha Franklin’s _Freeway of Love_, on the way to San Jose in a pink Cadillac, an image of mainstream opportunity. Along the way, one can see the evolution of blues toward rock and roll in the succession of songs from Robert Johnson’s _Terraplane Blues_ to _Rocket 88_, an homage to an Oldsmobile often considered the first true rock-and-roll song, and thence to Chuck Berry’s _Maybelline_ and Prince’s _Little Red Corvette_. And in early country and western music the road figures as a Bunyan-like course to sin or redemption: _Lost Highway_ is the most significant title here.

Until the telegraph, roads were a means of communication as well as transportation. They brought news from the far reaches of the empire, and delivered the message of military power and control. There were differences in speed, more marked as time went on. The Pony Express could move much faster but the means of delivery was the same.

. . .

Above all, American roads are public spaces. “Public Road,” Whitman’s inelegant, bureaucratic term, was current from the 1880s to the 1960s. Before this century, public roads were mostly inferior substitutes for private ones. The most sophisticated roads of the nineteenth century were private turnpikes, and the railroads were owned by giant corporations. Only the automobile made all roads public. Like television, American highways are a national network, a mass medium. Driving, in fact, has been studied by psychologists as a process not unlike watching television.

As we bemoan the effects of television, we also lament the effects of modern highways with almost the same intensity with which we devote ourselves to them.

They have had monstrous side effects. They have often rolled, like some gigantic version of the machines that built them, through cities, splitting communities off into ghettos, displacing people, and crushing the intimacies of old cities with a scale taken from dreams of the wide-open spaces. They have become a symbol of the American distrust and dislike for the city.

And yet American roads are a reservation of individuality and privacy. Americans have gone on the road to find America and find themselves, following in the naïve Whitmanesque mode. The song of the open road is also the song of the self, a song of elusive identity, of blue skies, blue roads, and the blues.

. . .

The road’s cult of the individual approaches the pathological. American society has found the death by accident of some fifty thousand people a year on the road an acceptable price to pay for preserving the individuality of the driver on the common ground of the highway. (The cumulative accident total long ago passed the common comparison of “more than in all wars the United States has fought.”) And we struggle along blindly in the face of immutable but incomprehensible laws by which each new highway seems to fill to capacity as soon as we can complete it. And yet we continue to dream of new highways, safe and free flowing open roads. For in America, highways are much more than a means of transportation. They come as close as anything we have to a central national space. They are a national promenade, “America’s Main Street,” and a medium in which grows the carnival of individual life and enterprise.

. . .

(image: patton 13.jpg)

##### The middle of the century brought Timex’s first watch, the Mercury—a wristwatch for the masses. Soon after came the Marlin (shown here), a waterproof design from 1954.

## Time Worn

### _I.D. Magazine,_ November 1999, pp. 78–79

### Strapping a clock on our wrists is only the first step toward toting a host of wearable technologies.

When the 20th century began, few people had any need to know exactly what time it was at any given moment. Factory workers’ schedules were regulated by whistles and bells; for most farm laborers, the procession of the sun across the fields was time clock enough. By the end of the century, however, knowing what time it is has become vital, and the wristwatch both universal and tremendously varied in design.

On a timetable of landmarks posted at the MIT Media Lab, the wristwatch is second only to John Harrison’s chronometer, the device that made the calculation of longitude possible. That’s a good way to think of the watch, here on the cusp of the century: as an early essay in portable computing. Computing time of day was once as mysterious as computing location. And the wristwatch, for much of this century, was a device as marvelous as Dick Tracy’s two-way wrist radio.

The first prototypes of the wristwatch as we know it today were made as early as the mid-19th century. But ownership didn’t become commonplace, even among the wealthy, until the first part of the 20th century, when wristwatches were handed down from generation to generation as heirlooms. To wear a watch was to be part of the modern world, and the wristwatch evolved in response to the topsy-turvy style of life in the new century—literally. It was linked with aviation and war and sport, activities in which people might turn sideways and even upside-down in tanks and airplanes, on roller-coasters and rides, beneath parachutes and down ski slopes. There was something daring about making portable such a precise, delicate machine. As marvelous a piece of miniaturization as any electronic product of our day, it began as an almost sensual piece of technological virtuosity. “My woman has a movement like an Elgin watch,” sang blues great Robert Johnson.

Louis Cartier’s Santos and Tank watches, extremely expensive artifacts still sold today, are embodiments of the romantic mythology of the modern wristwatch’s beginnings. The century began with such feats of aerodynamic daring as Alberto Santos-Dumont’s 1900 flight in a dirigible around the Eiffel Tower. Santos-Dumont, the story goes, asked his friend Louis Cartier for a wristwatch so he could keep his hands on the controls. The 1904 Santos was the result. By 1927, aviation and the wristwatch were tied together in a new way: When Lindbergh flew across the Atlantic, Bulova produced the Lone Eagle watch. The first 5,000 sold out in three days.

Along with aviation, war brought the wristwatch to prominence. Cartier modeled his Tank watch after a Renault tank, making its gold screws visible. World War I made the wristwatch popular, but it was after World War II that the U.S. interchangeable parts system allowed a mass-market product to be developed. In the U.S., watches came from clocks whereas in Europe, watch making derived from jewelry making. Most American watches displayed Arabic numerals and looked as casual next to the European Roman-numeral faces as the Vulgate bible does beside the Latinate.

As the century progressed, the watch became a collectible—a fashion and style product. By 1930, Ingersoll was offering the Mickey Mouse watch. The middle of the century brought the first Timex, the Mercury, a wristwatch for the masses. By replacing jewels with long-lasting bearings, Timex moved high- quality watches into the realm of high-grade industrial products. The resultant watches were far less expensive than precise Swiss watches, yet more durable and easy to produce. Soon Timex was the most popular watch brand in the country, known for its famous slogan: “Timex: It Takes a Licking and Keeps on Ticking.”

By the early fifties, beginning with Bulova’s Accutron, the watch spring was replaced first by a tuning fork, then a quartz crystal and finally a silicon chip—a neat bridging of the gap between mechanics and electronics that was echoed across the industry. Wristwatches were also established as elements of personal style; British design historian Stephen Bayley describes Fiat magnate Gianni Agnelli’s habit of wearing his wristwatch outside his shirt; in the seventies, President Jimmy Carter wore his turned so the face was on the inside of his wrist—a habit picked up during his service on submarines, where a sudden lurch could crack the crystal.

The wristwatch continued to reflect wider trends. During the seventies, digital displays carried prestige. To some digital watches were added absurd calculators with buttons so small no finger could activate them. Fitness trends and active lifestyles gave rise to the water- and impact-proof “sports watch.” Wristwatches today are often marketed as having been proven reliable by divers and drivers, pilots and mountain climbers, cosmonauts and aquanauts.

But the issue of digital versus analog has faded, like that of Roman numerals versus Arabic, subsumed in a new development that has made the wristwatch a touchstone of change in industrial design as a whole. The arrival of F. A. Hayek’s Swatch not only saved the Swiss watch industry, which was on the ropes from Japanese competition, but set a new paradigm: Cases of varying shapes and styles surround a basic mechanism that uses only a few parts. Once precious objects, wristwatches have become almost disposable, and they’re now collectible in a new way—for variety rather than rarity.

At the end of the century, the wristwatch demonstrates the appeal of diversity in design. Despite all predictions, Rolex and Santos have survived, but $3 Star Wars watches have also flourished. Swatch models that interact with cell phones, beepers and automobiles even suggest that telling time may no longer be the watch’s most essential function. As the 21st century rolls in, we can prepare for the video screens and GPS receivers to join time on our wrists.

> Exploring technologies from the telegraph to the then-novel mobile device, this essay frames the history of American office machinery through the dueling philosophies of two of America’s leading nation-builders: Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton. Pure Phil Patton in its wide-lens approach to design.

> —Donald Albrecht

(image: patton 12b.jpg)

##### Advertising image (detail), for Librex laptop computers, early 1990s.

## Technology in the Office: Individual Power and Collective Standards

### _On the Job: Design and the American Office,_ edited by Donald Albrecht and Chrysanthe B. Broikos, 2000, pp. 105–119 (excerpted chapter)

### Published in conjunction with the exhibition of the same name, shown at the National Building Museum, Washington, DC

Thomas Jefferson, our most gadget-obsessed president, was particularly fascinated with devices for his office. Having seen his papers destroyed by fire and menaced by invading troops, Jefferson was conscious of the need for governments to preserve copies of documents. He tried several versions of the pantograph, a mechanical tool that made copies of pen-written documents, and regularly used a copying press, a primitive form of carbon paper.

Jefferson’s letters, says Silvio A. Bedini in _Thomas Jefferson and His Copying Machines_, are full of notes on testing such duplicating devices as the Hawkins and Peale Patent Polygraph, Ralph Wedgewood’s Pennapolygraph, and the Manifold Stylographic Writer. He even devised portable desks to contain his favorite writing tools, from sealing wax to pens. (Jefferson owned one of the earliest fountain pens.) From rotating desk chairs and book holders to the portable writing desk on which he drafted the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson’s office tools were the products of decades of experimentation born of an Enlightenment optimism. Today, Jefferson’s devices are mostly footnotes to office history. However, his fascination prefigured a wider American belief that office tools could produce greater efficiencies and magnify the power of the individual.

Our common vision of ourselves, in the office as in the laboratory and factory, is Jeffersonian: We think of ourselves as a country of independent tinkerers, harvesting ideas and technologies, much as Jefferson idealized us as a nation of independent farmers. The America that creates new inventions in barns or garages, then turns them into huge industries, is a vision alive and well in twenty-first-century Silicon Valley.

But “growing technologies” has been only part of the tale. The reality is as much Hamiltonian as Jeffersonian. The birth of invention and industry and the evolution of office technology shows an important role for government investment and infrastructure, for the power of shared standards over individual innovations. Technology’s impact on the office, as on other spheres of life, has always been tempered by social and cultural factors, some resisting, some furthering innovation, and always torn between individual power and collective connection.

The arrival of machines in the office—the mechanical calculator, the address machine, the check writer—came as office planners and executives aspired to achieve for office work the results time-and-motion-study guru Frederick W. Taylor was bringing to manufacturing early in the twentieth century. The entry of machines into the work place required the adoption of standardized parts: The push for “scientific” office management led to the adoption of the same sort of standards that regulated the size of screws, bolts, and other fasteners in the factory. Even the typewriter did not achieve acceptance until its keyboard was conventionalized in the famous QWERTY arrangement, itself a “scientifically” engineered standard.

Jefferson’s dreams are now realized in the photocopier, computer, and laser printer for desktop publishing, and the digitization of documents in cyberspace. The evolution of office technologies between the eighteenth and twenty-first centuries—from the pantograph to the wireless Web—is the story of the dynamic interrelationship between invention and standards, freedom and connection, that characterized the nation’s modern development.

#### The Telegraph: Marching Orders

It should be no surprise that the telegraph was developed in the United States. Rapid settlement across vast distances made the device ideal for America. The body politic of democracy and capitalism became a body electric. With the telegraph, for the first time in history, communication and transportation were effectively separated. Until 1838 a written message had to be physically transported. The telegraph, invented by Samuel F.B. Morse, made information electrical for the first time. Morse code was the earliest form of software, demanding new kinds of clerks to code and decode it and new means of storage and transmission. Prefiguring the development of future office technology, the telegraph was a network system, dependent on accepted standards. Pioneered by an artist-tinkerer and implemented by financing from Congress, the telegraph established the pattern for the invention and production of successful office tools.<sup>1</sup>

The telegraph and the railroad functioned as sibling technologies, one directly following the other, together moving information and goods. Telegraph and rail helped realize the capacities of the American system of manufacture—the system of interchangeable parts pioneered by Eli Whitney (with Thomas Jefferson’s sponsorship) and realized in the armories that made guns for the U.S. Army. The changes wrought by the railroad and telegraph came to a head during the Civil War, when both played major roles in troop deployment. The need to muster huge armies required expanding the parts system that would later extend to office machines. Firearms were not the only war machines to use the new parts system. To outfit the army, clothing and boot sizes were standardized in order to make use of sewing machines and other equipment.

Railroads and, later, businesses applied the wartime lessons of the efficiencies and economies gained from standards to post–Civil War enterprise. . . . The paired technologies spread their networks across the landscape as the new American system of manufacturing grew, generating new military styles of organization as well as new types of office practice, storage, and employment. Bridging war and peace, merging public and private enterprise, collapsing time and space, uniting the United States with the first electronic network, the telegraph was a device that anticipated almost all the changes in technology that later affected the office.

#### The Telephone: Power Talk

The advance from telegraph to telephone, from a digital to an analog device, was more than simply an evolution. It marked a shift to an entirely different form of information. Carrying voice as well as code over wires, the telephone undercut the hierarchies of military-style organizations and heightened individual power to command—or rebel.

Alexander Graham Bell first conceived the telephone in 1876 as a broadcast device for delivering concerts and speeches to a passive audience. It was Theodore Vail, the power behind the rise of AT&amp;T, who grasped the potential of the telephone and asserted the principle of universal phone service—the goal of putting a telephone in every home and office. Vail understood that the telephone was a network system, and that the law of networks is that each additional unit in the system increases the value of the whole exponentially.

The 1876 Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia first showcased the telephone, but adoption was slow. As late as 1888, only sixty thousand telephones were installed. The real takeoff began in the 1890s as America’s corporate and consumer cultures blossomed. From 1896 to 1899, the number of phones doubled, and from 1896 to 1906 it increased tenfold. By 1920 there were ten million telephones in the United States.

At first, as Roland Marchand pointed out, the telephone ruled in the office as a symbol of power. In advertisements the telephone on the large desk served as an icon of executive authority.<sup>2</sup> E.H. Harriman, the railroad magnate, was known for having telephones everywhere he went, in his many houses and even in his private rail car. One admiring observer of the time, Herbert Casson, commented that “what the brush is to the artist, what the chisel is to the sculptor, the telephone was to Harriman. He built his fortune on it.”<sup>3</sup>

The telephone precipitated a major change in the face of American business. For the office, the telephone created a new relationship between the office and the outside world. In addition to the mailroom and visitor lobby or reception area, the switchboard, or PBX, served as the front face of the office. “To answer your own phone” turned into a symbol of accessibility that no self-respecting executive could abide. One of the additional roles taken on by secretaries was to answer the phone and filter incoming calls, providing both a link to and a buffer between the outside world and the office.

#### Typewriter: Machine Tool

Like the American factory, the typewriter broke down the traditional hand labor of writing into discrete, repeatable mechanical pieces—its keys. The commercialization of the typewriter depended on the American system of interchangeable parts that had been pioneered for firearms. One of the first companies to successfully manufacture the machine was Remington, the gunmaker, looking for additional fields of enterprise after the Civil War.

Remington’s first model went on the market in 1874 at a price of $125. It wasn’t until more than a decade later that a manufacturer offered a typewriter whose type line was visible to the user, or one with uppercase as well as lowercase letters. . . .

“Typewriter” was also the term given the operator of the machine—in many cases, a young woman. The machine and the woman arrived in offices together. Daniel Sutherland, in _The Expansion of Everyday Life, 1860–1876_, reported that women moved into the office during and after the Civil War.<sup>4</sup> Through the second half of the nineteenth century, the proportion of women clerical office workers increased steadily until, by 1920, they accounted for fully half of the work force. At first, the impetus was a shortage of male labor, but women soon proved themselves well-suited to operating the new office machinery. And, of course, women worked for less money than men. A male bookkeeper of the 1870s earned $1,800 a year, a woman only $500.

The typewriter and its operator quickly became inseparable: “Type girls” was a term in use by the 1870s. Mark Twain famously described one of the first demonstrations of the typewriter, in which a young girl repeatedly turned out high-speed copies of the poem beginning, “The boy stood on the burning deck.” Twain found he did far less well himself and eventually hired an operator to turn out _Tom Sawyer_, the first typescript for a published book.

. . .

The entrance of the typewriter into the office spurred other standards in office supplies and furniture. No less shrewd an observer than Le Corbusier, for example, noted how the typewriter propelled the adoption of the 8.5 × 11–inch sheet of paper as the standard business letter size, with corresponding carbon paper and envelopes to fit. The same dimensions ruled the size of file folders to hold documents and file cases to hold file folders. The desk, in turn, became conventionalized as filing drawers replaced the pigeonholed storage systems of the past, which kept papers rolled in scroll-like fashion and wrapped in the red tape that became the emblem of bureaucratic sloth. At the dawn of World War I, new “scientifically” designed and standardized desks, such as the Modern Efficiency Desk, replaced the private, hutchlike ones of the past. From this simple machine—the typewriter—an office landscape of efficiency and standardization developed.

. . .

#### The Pentagon, the Mainframe Computer, and Systems Thinking

Mustering human and material resources on an unprecedented scale was the task of the Pentagon, planned in 1941 as the world’s largest office building—even before Pearl Harbor. Taking its shape from a traditional five-sided fortification, the building became a symbol of the new blending of government, military, science, and academia.

Among the Pentagon’s contributions to postwar business culture was the creation of the digital computer, which was originally conceived to calculate complex artillery trajectories and then was quickly applied to code-breaking and other tasks. After World War II, the computer was adopted by private enterprise. Administering such vast military projects, argued Thomas P. Hughes in his study of massive modern projects, _Rescuing Prometheus_, led to the rise of systems thinking, analysis, and planning that grew in symbiosis with computers. Systems thinking, which analyzed the function and flow of information as a whole, dominated the 1950s economic landscape and the Cold War, reshaping the office in the process.<sup>5</sup>

‘The system is the solution,” AT&amp;T’s famous postwar slogan, was the mantra of all corporate America in the 1950s and 1960s. From the sort of big business Alfred Chandler described in his book _The Visible Hand_ to the contractors, research labs, and think tanks of the military-industrial-academic complex, the systems ethos built on and ultimately superceded Taylorite visions of the office.

The icon of systems thinking was the mainframe computer, a force at once marvelous and intimidating. The new computers figured in the office landscape like huge pieces of industrial machinery requiring constant care and feeding (and often requiring their own sequestered offices). An established trope in popular culture by the early 1950s, with blinking lights flashing patterns meaningless to humans, the mainframe inspired visions of dystopia as much as utopia. . . .

Offices for business systems housed large numbers of people laboring on standardized modules of work. . . . The private office increasingly became a rare refuge for top executives. More typical was the large office plain dotted with identical desks. . . .

. . .

#### The personal computer

The step from the word processor to the multipurpose personal computer (PC) was a natural one. Developed by hobbyists in the mid-1970s, the personal computer was recast as a business machine with the introduction of IBM’s first model, the IBM Personal Computer, in 1981. . . .

. . .

The personal computer’s ambition to replace the conventional desk was manifested in the 1984 advent of the Apple Macintosh computer. Using a “desktop metaphor,” Macintosh projected the computer screen as a virtual desktop, with programs designated by icons pulled from storage—not in drawers but in computer memory. To organize software these icons, or small ideograms, presented images of corresponding physical devices—a text program was represented by a pen or quill, an address file by a Rolodex, etc. The desk had migrated inside the works of the computer.<sup>6</sup>

In spite of the intent to replace the desk with the virtual desktop, the PC’s attached peripherals, from printers to storage disks and scanners, soon took over the actual desktop, elbowing aside earlier devices. Furniture makers responded by designing desks with sliding keyboard trays and secondary computer stands, thereby reincarnating the typing table in a new form.

The computer would ultimately triumph in the office via “desktop publishing,” which required that computers be attached to high-quality printers. These printers were an outgrowth of the photocopier, the device that almost as much as the computer did away with the old manual work of the copyist.

Photocopying has long been a business ideal. Just as Western Union dismissed the importance of the telephone, IBM turned down the photocopier originally developed in the 1930s by Chester “Chet” Carlson, the classic solo inventor who carried out his first experiments in an apartment above a Queens, New York, beauty parlor. It took a speculative investment by the Batelle Foundation after World War II to create the Xerox Corporation around Carlson’s invention. Although the company was profitable by the mid-1950s, Xerox sales zoomed with its introduction of the Model 914 in 1960. Soon familiar in every office as a gathering spot for workers, the photocopier represented another implicit message: Unchecked reproduction of documents actually undermines central control. The tight restrictions on copying machines in totalitarian societies (consider the Xerox distribution of underground literature in Russia) and the Daniel Ellsburg Pentagon Papers case suggested the power of copying machines to let the individual escape a central structure. (Significantly, it was Xerox’s advanced development facility in Palo Alto, California, that served as the incubator for the personal computer—the ultimate symbol of liberating technology.)

. . . Combining the copier and the telephone, Xerox’s Telecopier of 1976 is generally cited as the first commercially available facsimile machine. But it was not until the early 1980s, when international agencies standardized fax transmission protocols, that the technology really took off. By that time Japanese companies such as Canon and Toshiba had succeeded in producing lower-cost machines. By the summer of 1986, facsimile transmission became cheaper than international telex. The number of fax machines nearly doubled between 1987 and 1988. The November 1988 cover story in _New York_ magazine heralded the fax’s fashionability by nothing that the word “fax” had become a verb as well as a noun.<sup>7</sup>

Capable of transmitting images as well as words and numbers, the fax became an essential business technology with the unprecedented capacity to communicate documents immediately. It was of particular benefit to companies whose engineering and design staffs might be located in Europe or the United States and their factories in Asia. Few office technologies had ever become so essential so quickly. It became another node that connected the office to the outside world, while centralizing its own social relations, as the switchboard and the photocopier had.

Almost as quickly, however, fax machines became components of personal computers, decentralized and available at every desk.

#### From Desktop to Laptop

The personal computer challenged the data-processing departments that had become powerful forces in many companies. The PC undermined the degree of control a company could exercise over its machines and, consequently, its employees. Beginning with portable computers such as the Osborne and Kaypro, the computer began to leave the office. Adam Osborne, who created the first portable personal computer in 1981, promised “to drive secretaries out of every office in America.”<sup>8</sup> But secretaries, many of whom were now called “executive assistants,” were marks of prestige too important for executives to give up overnight. And many executives and managers lacked typing skills, not to mention the willingness to learn new technologies, even if those technologies would make them more efficient. As the PC became an obligatory symbol of being up-to-date, it sat little-used behind an executive’s traditional desk.

The portable computer was different. The first important laptop was the Grid Compass (1982), which helped establish the form of the traveling computer. As the large mahogany desk had previously signaled executive power, the thin black laptop came to identify corporate energy in the 1980s. The names of such products as IBM’s ThinkPad and Apple’s Powerbook suggested brainpower and strength. By the 1980s the shape was clear: a crisp black rectangle (inspired in part by camera and firearm design), a power icon that succeeded the mainframe and the desktop PC as a totem of office technology. By the 1990s, a decade that celebrated the entrepreneur, a prestigious office was not a large suite with a vast wooden desk and a high-back chair. Instead, the new CEO’s office was a laptop and an Adirondack chair in the wilderness—at least according to computer company advertising.

#### Personal Digital Assistants: From Virtual Desktop to Virtual Office

In the 1980s, admiration for Japanese economic success helped reshape American industry and the American office. Growing out of the rethinking of Taylorite manufacturing, ideals of “lean” or “just-in-time” manufacturing fascinated Americans in the 1980s. Inspired by a Japan that had carried Taylor-style scientific management to a higher level of refinement and humanity, Americans placed new emphasis on teamwork in the office. In addition, planning and “knowledge work”—or what economist Robert B. Reich, former secretary of labor under Bill Clinton, called “symbol manipulation”—became a new focus for office planners.<sup>9</sup>

One result was the abandonment of the traditional office entirely. Just-in-time production led to just-in-time office work. Employees might work at home, by telecommuting, or drop in at the office according to the needs of a project rather than a punch clock. The number of workers at home doubled to 25 million between 1983 and 1993. . . .

Such efforts were abetted by the new generation of computer devices known as personal digital assistants (PDAs), which began to appear in the late 1980s and early 1990s and soon became widespread. These portable devices work without keyboards, using a stylus and handwriting recognition. But many of them have retained the desktop metaphor. From Apple’s Newton, publicized under the slogan “Put your office in the palm of your hand,” to the Palmpilot, the prevailing metaphor is a desk that fits in a coat pocket.

. . .

The challenge of linking personal computers to each other and to common servers has occupied engineers for a long time, as they have developed local area networks with such technologies as Ethernet. Electrical cords and data cabling were always a problem in that they created tangled messes and are hard to move. More and more wires multiplied the difficulties. In the 1970s, some office interior designers adopted the strategy of restaurants and retail establishments by leaving wires, pipes, and HVAC vents exposed.<sup>10</sup> By the 1990s the wires that linked computers to each other and to the Internet joined plumbing and mechanical devices in this open, informal display. In high-tech companies, the informality sometimes extended to desks, laden with computer equipment, made of doors on top of sawhorses.

This ad hoc style characterized the offices of the Internet company Razorfish, which moved into the space vacated by Chiat/Day in Los Angeles in 1998. Semiscreened computer stations, linked to the company Intranet and the Internet beyond, are joined by visible wires. At the New York Razorfish office, the visual focus of the space is the Internet server and router system: The computer linking the office to the wired world beyond is proudly displayed behind glass, as mainframes had been forty years before. Beside the router room stands a display of obsolete portable computing equipment—like the booty of captured nations hauled before a Roman imperial arch of triumph. If portability and mobility are a challenge to the office based on individuality, a countervailing desire for connection and the power it brought are displayed here. Increasingly, wireless devices such as cell phones and PDAs seem to be merging into a single unit—a new version of the portable desk Jefferson designed to carry from Monticello to Philadelphia and Washington. A key phrase at the turn of the twenty-first century that looks to a convergence of telephone and computer is “wireless Web,” an image suggesting the continuing tension between independence and mobility, on the one hand, and centralization and connection, on the other.

This age-old American tension has been recast in the vision of the office as a place to be escaped from but never out of touch with, a locale for innovation but also for shared standards. This new office is the latest proof that technology, which has always come to the office as a new means for individual expression, ends up as confirmation of the need for common ground.

##### 1 Tom Standage, _The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the Telegraph and the Nineteenth Century’s On-Line Pioneers_ (New York: Walker, 1998).

##### 2 Roland Marchand, _Advertising the American Dream: Making Way for Modernity, 1920–1940_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985), 239–42.

##### 3 Herbert N. Casson, _History of the Telephone_ (1910; reprint Freeport, N.Y.: Books for Libraries Press, 1971), 159.

##### 4 Daniel E. Sutherland, _The Expansion of Everyday Life, 1860–1876_ (New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1989), 202–04.

##### 5 Thomas P. Hughes, _Rescuing Prometheus_ (New York: Pantheon, 1998), 141–95.

##### 6 The virtual desktop was originally developed at Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Center, which first applied it in the ALTO computer. Xerox researchers Alan Kay went to Apple and Charles Simonyi to Microsoft, where he helped create Windows, Microsoft’s version of the graphical user interface.

##### 7 David Blum, “Fax Mania,” _New York_ (November 21, 1988), 40–44.

##### 8 Adam Osborne, Author interview, 1982.

##### 9 Robert B. Reich, _The Work of Nations: Preparing Ourselves for 21st-Century Capitalism_ (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1991).

##### 10 Joan Kron and Suzanne Slesin, _High Tech: The Industrial Style and Sourcebook for the Home_ (New York: Clarkson Potter, 1978).

(image: OnTheJob_109.jpg)

> Phil found worthy design in its loftiest forms—and its lowest. In so doing, he helped us to see the simple virtues of everyday objects, in this case the humble hammer.

> —Michael Cannell

## For the Frustrated Carpenter

### _New York Times,_ November 2, 2000

“Everybody wants to be Norm,” said Don Lamond, the designer of Oxo’s new Good Grips hammer, referring to Norm Abrams of _This Old House_. With sheetrock sales soaring and Home Depot parking lots overflowing, it was bound to happen: the designer hammer has arrived.

The humble hammer was once the most generic of products—without style, untouched by fashion, as timeless as a folk song. There were many kinds, of course, for many purposes: roofing hammers, tack hammers, ball-peen hammers. Karl Marx marveled at the ability of capitalism to produce the dizzying array of hammers manufactured in the 19th-century factories of Birmingham, England.

Today’s hyperactive economy offers an even greater variety. Oxo introduced its sleek black and silver hammer earlier this year as an extension of its award-winning line of Good Grips garden and kitchen tools. With soft black rubber handles in shapes as affable as Tim Allen, the Good Grips tools are sold in housewares stores like Linens ’n Things, not far from the Good Grips spatulas and pasta accessories. The hammer comes in a lightweight model—just 10 ounces—for $24. The 16-ounce model lists for $25.

Elsewhere, low-cost Asian manufacturers have driven down the price of hammers and, some say, their quality. A basic hammer now sells for six or seven dollars in corner hardware stores. So when the designer Bob Brunner, of Pentagram Design, was approached by John Chen, a Taiwanese manufacturer, he assumed Mr. Chen’s company, Jyu Mang, wanted another cheap knockoff. But Mr. Chen wanted a designer product— “a Pentagram hammer”—Mr. Brunner recalled.

This year, Mr. Brunner’s futuristic Ergo Series Heavy Hitter hammer will go on sale at Wal-Mart and other stores. “It’s designed to suggest a piece of high-end sporting equipment rather than a construction professional’s tool,” said Mr. Brunner, who is best known for designing Toshiba computers and was previously head of design at Apple.

Despite its formidable name, the Heavy Hitter was designed for apartment dwellers, and its look is less macho than its name suggests. It is sleek, with a sweeping curve joining head and handle that implies speed and grace. It could be a rock-climbing tool from the Patagonia catalog. Three holes punched through the handle, like holes drilled in race car brake pedals, ensure lightness. Five raised rubber knobs protruding from the top protect walls when the hammer is used to extract nails.

Weekend renovation and repairs have become a form of recreation for many office workers, a refreshingly physical and tactile antidote to weekdays spent desk-bound, grappling with abstractions. It’s a suburban sport, like cooking outdoors, and no accident that Oxo introduced barbecue tools as a kind of bridge between its cushioned kitchen tools, originally conceived by Smart Design in Manhattan, and home repair tools. To design its hammer, Oxo turned to Human Factor Industrial Design, of Edgewater, N.J. The idea was to apply the universal design approach of the Good Grips handles to home repair tools.

The resulting hammer (along with similar screwdrivers and pliers) has a large, soft rubber handle and a magnetized tip to hold nails. Like the rival Heavy Hitter, it is also designed to protect walls from careless nail removal.

Mr. Lamond, the designer, comes from a family of contractors. In shaping a hammer for the do-it-yourselfer, he said, he drew upon their experience. “To avoid marring walls when they pull a nail, they’ll pick up a stub of soft wood and set it beneath the head of the hammer,” he said. “We incorporated that idea as a rubberized tip on the head.” It has a trademarked name, Marguard.

If professional contractors are disturbed by the notion that any duffer can do repairs or build a house, as home repair shows suggest, at least the pros can distinguish themselves with the Death Stick hammer. “Don’t just drive it, kill it!” is the slogan used to advertise the rough, hefty hammer. Its 19-inch black hickory handle bears a skull and crossbones worthy of a biker’s tattoo.

One of its creators, Marty Fortier, previously sold a line of Death Stick golf clubs for the “grunge golf” market. The clubs never took off, he said. But then, three years ago, he met Donnie Deford, a former hardware salesman. They became partners, fashioning the Death Stick hammer for carpenters and contractors who frame houses. “Instead of approaching the hammer market from a strictly technological aspect,” Mr. Fortier said, “we added a lifestyle appeal. We understand the mentality of the framer-contractor. He’s a rugged individual who wants his tools to match his lifestyle, and why not?”

The $35 Death Stick was an immediate hit. Within three years, Mr. Fortier said, their company, Dead On Tools, went from stamping out hammers by hand to shipping 20,000 a month from a plant in Huntington Beach, Calif.

They quickly added another product: the Exhumer nail puller, which comes with two thoughtful details, a saw blade wrench of the sort framers always lose, and a built-in bottle opener.

> Phil and I graduated from the same high school in Raleigh, North Carolina. This

> ode to our hometown celebrates the city’s shining moment as a testing ground for modern architecture and design.

> —Molly Fulghum Heintz

(image: N_72_8_8 Dorton Arena.jpg)

##### Dorton Arena, Raleigh, North Carolina.

## Home of the “Potato Chip”

### _Dwell,_ October 2001, pp. 84–85

### Today it’s better known for sports teams and research labs, but for a brief period in the ’50s, Raleigh was the Bauhaus of the Bible Belt.

To some it looked like a spaceship, oddly juxtaposed with the low sheds and arcades of the North Carolina State fairgrounds. Built in 1952, the building that would improbably come to be called the signature structure of Raleigh, North Carolina, was a swooping assemblage of concrete bands—two intersecting parabolas from which hung a saddle-like roof.

Held each October, the state fair was a highlight of the years I spent growing up in Raleigh. Thousands trooped in to enjoy such rides as the Wild Mouse and folk competitions like the watermelon seed–spitting contest—the winners regularly surpassed 25 feet. The Future Farmers of America had a booth each year at the fair—and some years so did the Ku Klux Klan.

Looming over it all, I remember from those fall afternoons in the 1960s, was Dorton Arena, called the “cow palace” by locals, many of whom had no idea that the building was world famous, found in architecture texts between the bridges of Maillart and Nervi’s Olympic Stadium. In textbooks, the building was regularly described as a “stock judging pavilion”: over the years Dorton Arena has been the scene not only of dog shows and bull-judging competitions but of tractor pulls and Bigfoot trucks.

Dorton was designed by Polish-born architect Matthew Nowicki, who headed up the architecture department of North Carolina State University’s design school and who died in a plane crash before the arena was completed. More than a Greek revival State Capitol, more than the Victorian Governor’s Mansion, the bold structure gave North Carolina’s capital a sense of itself.

That identity, however, is not entirely due to the building’s architectural virtuosity, but rather owes much to the contrast between the visionary and the provincial.

Far less well known is a structure that sat about a mile or two from Dorton and was strikingly similar in shape. The house Eduardo Catalano built for himself was a hyperbolic parabola of three layers of plywood, a great roof that was also the basic structure of the house. Hailed in the mid-’50s as “the house of the decade” by _House and Home_ magazine and praised by Frank Lloyd Wright, the Catalano house was known locally as the “potato chip house.” To Robert Burns of N.C. State’s architecture department, however, the house was more like “a leaf that has drifted to ground.” The house was, he says, part of “an impressive body of modern architecture that rivals that in many large American cities”—and the best known of Raleigh’s modernist homes.

The oldest of these houses was built in 1949 by the man who made it all happen: Henry L. Kamphoefner, who was hired from the University of Oklahoma to establish N.C. State’s School of Design. He, like many at the time, dreamed of setting up a Bauhaus in the Bible Belt. Kamphoefner was a persuasive and even bullying sort, who cast his net widely for talent. Guest faculty included Lewis Mumford, Buckminster Fuller, Mies, and Gropius. Kamphoefner also hired Catalano, Nowicki, George Matsumoto, and the California modernist Harwell Hamilton Harris.

The legacy of these teachers lies primarily in the students they influenced. But they left a clutch of important buildings in Raleigh itself, many of which are now surrounded by a half-century’s expansion of greenery. The rhododendrons, azaleas, dogwoods, and towering pines make many of the homes almost invisible in neighborhoods where the more common architectural inspirations are Tara and the palaces of royal colonial governors.

More like a Wright design than the Catalano house is the wide, low Paschal house designed by James Fitzgibbon, another N.C. State faculty member. Featured on the cover of _Architectural Record Houses_ in 1957 was George Matsumoto’s house on Runnymede Road, a long, white box radiating a sense of hovering calm. There is a faint Japanese air to such details as the small entrance bridge. Matsumoto’s Ritcher House of 1950 has been carefully preserved. A Miesian box floating above a parking area and a small rock garden with fountain, the 1966 office of G. Milton Small and Associates is a minor local landmark. Set on the edge of a traditional Raleigh neighborhood, it, like Dorton Arena, seems to have fallen from space.

Certainly such structures were an odd fit into the local environment.

And by the end of the 1960s Raleigh’s modernist experiment seemed to have stalled. Many of the stars of the N.C. State design school left; Catalano moved to M.I.T. almost as soon as his house was finished; Matsumoto returned to California.

The way modernism played out in Raleigh also suggested its limits. To keep exuberant fairgoers from marching up the Dorton’s concrete parabolas, no-nonsense fair managers erected miniature chain-link fences a few feet off the ground. And the Catalano house roof proved vulnerable to rot from built-up leaves; its wings had to be re-stressed with tension cables after a few years.

Not until 1995 did the city landmark several of the important modern houses; they are also on the national register. A few years ago, however, deterioration of the Catalano house had gone so far that its owner was forced to move out. After years of efforts by Preservation NC and the North Carolina Museum of Art to raise funds to save it, the house was finally destroyed last March. That event would seem to bring closure to the strange and daring interval of experiment with modernism in North Carolina. But the owners of the existing modern houses stay in touch, a cadre of insurgents. At the N.C. State design school, which has gone on to distinction in industrial design and graphic arts, such faculty as Frank Harmon and Brian Shawcroft build on the architectural tradition, of which many in Raleigh are still ignorant. Henry Kamphoefner, who died in 1990 at age 82, fought for his vision to the end, teaching until he was 79. His house is now in the hands of a sympathetic owner, who has commissioned Robert Burns to build a matching addition. And Catalano himself has offered to finance and direct the construction of a new version of the roof of his house, a pavilion without walls, on the grounds of the North Carolina Museum of Art. It would be a fitting monument.

(image: 10-18-91 #3.jpg)

##### Patton notebook, October 18–31, 1991

> I’d always look forward to starting my Saturday morning with his _Times_ auto design column to see what unexpected newness he had in store for us.

> —Paul Herzan

## Grilles Are Asking to Be Taken at Face Value

### _New York Times,_ November 17, 2003

Lewis Clayton, a partner in the New York law firm Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, knows firsthand how important automobile grilles are. As an intellectual property lawyer, he polices an area of law that includes logos and trademarks, the rights to song lyrics and even the design of toys like the Barbie doll.

Writing in _The New York Law Journal_, he traced the course of a public dispute over the form of an auto grille. The two-year legal battle pitted Jeep and its parent company, DaimlerChrysler, against General Motors and its design for the grille of the Hummer H2 sport utility. Jeep has vigorously defended the use of its brand name for many years, and it obviously values the look of its vehicles’ front ends. The seven-slot grille used on the Wrangler, Liberty and Grand Cherokee is also the essence of the Jeep logo, resembling the Ionic columns of a Greek temple.

So perhaps it wasn’t surprising that the company literally made a federal case of what it saw as design infringement by Hummer and General Motors. Still, Jeep and DaimlerChrysler came up empty-handed.

In February, Judge Robert L. Miller Jr. of the United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana ruled in favor of G.M., and on May 19 DaimlerChrysler agreed to accept the final ruling.

“Basically, the court concluded there was no confusion as to source,” Mr. Clayton said. No one, the court reasoned, would accidentally buy a Hummer instead of a Jeep because of its grille.

The case provides a reminder of how important grilles are to the identity and image of a vehicle brand. In the aero-conscious 1980s, grilles grew smaller and in some cases almost disappeared, leaving vehicles with a mouthless, mute look. Over the last few years, despite improvements in the cooling systems that lie behind grilles, they have grown larger and come to play a more prominent role in design.

Auto designers speak of grilles in terms of faces, cues and heritage. They also note how crucial grilles are to “down the road graphics” or D.R.G.s—the signature visual elements of a car in motion. It’s a phrase that brings a smile to the face of Gavin Ivester, the top designer and a senior vice president of Puma, the athletic shoe maker.

A car buff as well as the architect of Puma’s recent revival, Mr. Ivester contrasts D.R.G. with its footwear equivalent, the “vamp,” or the view you see of a shoe on your own foot. The Puma stripes on the side of the shoe, best seen when it’s displayed on a store shelf, provide the most eye-catching perspective for Mr. Ivester. “Their down-the-road is our across-the-room,” he said. The shape of a grille is like the Puma stripes, both of which are “like flying the flag.”

Mr. Ivester admires the flexibility of BMW’s distinctive grilles, which can be stretched up or down to suit almost any size or type of vehicle. He is less impressed by the front view of the Porsche Cayenne. “It says Porsche but looks like the front of a 911 was simply grafted onto a truck,” he said. “There’s a disconnect between sports car and sport utility.”

Walter de’Silva, the former chief of design at Alfa Romeo, was known for cleverly updating grilles. Now at Audi, he returned to the grilles of the past to stake out the shape of the company’s future models. On the Nuvolari concept car, unveiled at the Geneva auto show last March, he returned to the 1930s. In the concept, named for Tazio Nuvolari, the race driver, the bold grille is pushed ahead of the body like the shield of a knight charging into combat. That grille anchors the flowing shapes of the new car, Mr. de’Silva said, and gives rise to the main line of the car.

A grille is the mouth of a car’s face as well as the family crest of the brand. The upright tombstone of a Rolls-Royce grille, the sporty nostrils that serve as an ID card for Pontiac, and the cascade of chrome that defines a Mercury, are all like logos themselves. Like the ancient symbolic language of heraldry—escutcheons, blazons and gules—the visual language of grille design has a vocabulary of its own.

Before becoming the automotive coat of arms, of course, the grille’s purpose was to protect early radiators from flying stones. The radiator developed in 1900 by Gottlieb Daimler and his chief engineer, Wilhelm Maybach, brought a major innovation in its use of honeycomb-shaped fluid tubes to expose maximum cooling surface to the air, according to Harry Niemann, the company historian for Mercedes-Benz.

Like the fanciful shapes of radiator caps, the protective shields in front of radiators quickly evolved into decorative elements. But the honeycomb has endured as one of the most frequently recurring shapes.

The grille of the new Ford F-150 pickup, among others, is based on the honeycomb, subtly suggesting the industry and efficiency of the beehive—a symbol traditionally used by banks to communicate thrift. Other traditional grille themes are the egg crate, with repetitive compartments like the floorplan of a modern office building, and the popular crisscross motifs that form diamond patterns, suggesting the security of metal fencing.

Some automakers, including Jaguar and more recently, Cadillac, use special grilles to set apart sport or performance models from mainstream cars. The “tuner” edition Cadillac CTS-V will signal its ferocity —the car has a Corvette-derived engine—by placing in front of it a woven-wire grille whose look suggests the chain mail of jousting knights.

A more subtle message is conveyed by the grille of the new Bentley Continental GT. Bentley’s Belgian-born designer, Dirk van Braeckel, said at the car’s introduction that the most distinctive Bentley feature of all is the “matrix” radiator grille. Mr. Van Braeckel wanted to evoke tradition while also signaling high technology in the new car’s engine and features. “We reduced brightwork on the rest of the car to focus attention on the grille,” he said.

In the shape of that grille, he reinterpreted the wire grilles of the prewar Blower Bentley racers. The new grille is a matrix, laser-cut from steel in a complex pattern that reinterprets the traditional twists of wire with an abstract, futuristic effect. It not only passes the key test of immediate recognizability—it has good D.R.G.—but it conveys a complex visual message.

For all the legalisms, grilles are convicted or acquitted on the road. As testimony to the communicative power of grilles, Mr. Clayton calls an expert witness. They are the reason, he said, that “my 6-year-old son can recognize any vehicle on the road without being able to read.”

> Phil and I met in 1999 at a MoMA exhibition for which he was a curatorial consultant examining the future of the automobile and its impact on society and the environment. We became good friends and spoke frequently about design, baseball, museums, taxis, low riders, hubcaps, and, of course, our wives and kids.

> —Paul Herzan

## The Language of Auto Emblems

### _AIGA,_ April 6, 2004

One story explaining origins of the Chevrolet “bowtie” logo holds that while visiting Paris in 1907, General Motors founder William Durant became so intrigued by the pattern of his hotel wallpaper that he tore off a sample and tucked it into his wallet. In 1913, he pulled it out to create an emblem for the line of cars bearing the name of race driver Louis Chevrolet, whose name at least sounded French. It is a story too good to doubt. I enjoy envisioning Mr. Durant, whose enthusiasm for assembling car companies created the giant company later wrested from his grasp by a corporate coup, tugging out his wallet from time to time and contemplating the increasingly tattered wallpaper. The graphic device it bore was to be rendered in many ways on millions of vehicles in the years to come, signifying a brand boasting of being, “The heartbeat of America.” Although automotive brands are among the most powerful on the planet, most of them have origins at least as random as Chevrolet’s.

With their beginnings in hood ornaments that initially capped radiators, auto emblems are frequently obscure in origin and meaning, either unplanned in development or attributed to committee design. But there is a whole language and history to auto emblems and the other chrome “bright work” insignia of the auto world. Models, engines and features are indicated in graphic form on auto bodies, but the shape of the vehicle itself is the dominant design—and dominant graphic. Only recently created brands such as Saturn or Lexus show signs of professional logo thinking.

Last year Jeep rolled out what the company called its first logo ever: “A graphic representation of the front grille and windshield of the Wrangler, the icon of the Jeep brand. . .depicts the strong styling cues of the Wrangler. . . the seven-slot grille, round headlights and rectangular windshield.” Jeep is one of the best known brands in the world, that it should not have a logo or emblem is surprising. The image elicited by the word “Jeep” is clear as a logo. It is of a vehicle—boxy and basic—and especially its grille.

Logos and emblems are less important in the automotive world than what auto designers call “down the road graphics,” the features that make a Jeep or a Ford recognizable without any identifying graphics. The goal is that from a distance the three-dimensional form of a vehicle reads as a flat image, a stop-action graphic. In an ideal design, the brand of the vehicle should be evident from any angle. “Down the road graphics” have to be visible from all angles, including the most oblique.

The last generation Ford Taurus took this idea so literally that its entire body theme was built on the oval of the Ford logo: its silhouette, the shape of its rear window, even the outline of its instrument panel.

Automotive graphics tend to trail fashions in corporate and consumer product graphics by several years. They remain tied to their origins in hood ornaments, as on Mercedes, Jaguar and Rolls-Royce, whose current Silver Lady drops down into a protective bunker atop the hood of the new Phantom model.

The 1950s and 1960s were great years of exuberant auto graphics—as they were for auto bodies. I recall from childhood the Oldsmobile globe-in-a-ring and rocket emblems, and the Rocket 88 symbol—part Werner Von Braun, part Chesley Bonestell—images that made the unabashed conation between motoring and space flight. One still sees them at classic car shows and suburban cruise nights: Pontiacs with Chief Pontiac, with the colored glass elements melded into chrome, the amber glass now crazed with age. Studebakers with sinous, Raymond Loewy-designed S’s in rippling red discs. Hudson Wasps and Hornets with little chrome blimps of logos. The Chrysler Imperial in cursive suggesting the signage of a Las Vegas hotel or casino.

Some of the same spirit survives today. Most auto graphics remain chunky pieces of applied pseudo chrome. But walk through a parking lot these days and you see more innovation: the softly textured, powdery, brushed metal cursive rendition of “Cayenne” on Porsche’s new SUV for instance, the toothpaste-like rendition of neon lights on the Dodge Neon subcompact.

The best thing about the new Chevrolet Impala is the silhouette of the leaping ungulate on the side of the rear pillar or sail. In its stablemate, the Monte Carlo, the Chevrolet bowtie lends shape to the headlights in a gesture likely to go over the heads of that car’s youthful market—the model designation is rendered in a flat black script. This graphic wears a vaguely Iberian look—it could be Southern California, even Mexican restaurant—suggesting the possibility that the designers believe that Monte Carlo is located in Spain.

In 1998, when Cadillac began creating a new design language for its models called “art and science,” graphic designer Anne-Marie LaVerge-Webb of GM’s corporate and brand identity group was called on to rethink the Cadillac emblem. The new design theme aimed to combine suggestions of high technology and elegance through faceted shapes—inspired by the stealth fighter and by gemstones. LaVerge-Webb, a graduate of CCS in Detroit had come from an ad agency. She reviewed the history of the Cadillac emblem, which had appeared in many variatons over the years.

The designers, she said, reviewed dozens of emblems from grilles and trunks throughout Cadillac history, including rare items in a special collection kept in a drawer in the design studio in Warren. “The big question was whether the change would be evolutionary or revolutionary,” she said. She describes the choice as evolutionary, but it seems more dramatic than that.

The original Cadillac logo is based on the family crest of the man for whom the company was named, the Gascon officer and minor aristocrat who founded Detroit in 1701—Antoine de La Mothe, Sieur de Cadillac. His coat of arms, like many family coats of arms, appears to have been concocted and borrowed from a more noble neighbor. This may be appropriate for a car that has often appealed to the self-made man—if the not the nouveau riche hustler.

For the new logo, however, there was a need to match a new body theme. Cadillac’s top designers and Wayne Cherry, head of all GM design, were involved. “Wayne wanted to be sure the logo looked like an essential part of the grille, not something tacked on,” LaVerge-Webb said. The new look of the cars was to be high tech, a “milled from solid metal” look. The group decided on a major changes to the traditional crest and wreath emblem. The new “Wreath &amp; Crest” logo was unveiled at the 1999 Pebble Beach Concours d’Elegance, where collectors and designers assemble to appreciate collector cars. The shield wore the colors from Cadillac tradition: red, silver and blue, black and gold on a platinum background, aimed to suggest high technology. But the pearl-topped crown was gone as were the merlettes or ducks from the coat of arms of the original nobleman. The wreath was to be faceted, too, its leaves reinterpreted in a mechanical form.

The result suggested a Mondrian.

The “merlettes” or ducks had been used in an infamous ad campaign for the small Cadillac Catera, billed as “the Cadillac that zigs instead of zags.” One duck was seen swimming in the direction opposite the others. But on the new logo the merlettes were gone; many saw the ducks as collateral casualties of the failure of the Catera.

“We wanted to make it less fussy, more technical. The look we were aiming for was the milled out of a single billet of aluminum. The ducks felt fussy,” she said. Furthering the high tech theme, the typeface for model designations is a handdrawn and modified version of Serpentine.

Removing the crown was also read by some as a quiet abandonment of Cadillac’s longtime proud motto, “The standard of the world,” a claim no longer supported by sales, quality or customer satisfaction ratings. Beyond the hundreds of drawings for the new logo, considerations of materials and manufacturing took over. Even a few pennies of cost figure in acceptance of logo designs as in all parts of the auto industry, where costs are multiplied over millions of cars. The physical logos and other graphics are tested extensively over two years for endurance to heat, cold, and salt damage.

Stereolithography is used to produce models for visual testing for size: proportion of the logo to body shape and position is critical. Logo sizes and shapes vary according the vehicle of course: the current Escalade SUV and truck wears the largest Cadillac logo ever. It is known internally as “the frisbee.” Cadillac recently introduced the high performance CTS-V model, with a Corvette engine. It is the first of a new “V” line whose logo squeezes and angles the colors of the basic crest so they suggest a racing flag and attaches them to a V evoking V-shaped engines. The V is tilted as if with speed. The logo for V-Series models employs the same basic elements. But according to Kip Wasenko, design director, GM Performance Division, who oversaw the design of the V-Series logo.”While its colors are meant to depict the ’luxury’ side of Cadillac, its vertical orientation and its forward-leaning angle to the right are both meant to depict motion and performance.”

#### Origins of some auto logos

— Mercedes tri star, the story goes, was inspired by a star Gottlieb Daimler penned on a postcard of Cologne, marking where he was living and sent to his children. Today, a rotating tri star is visible on the skyline of almost every German city. Benz brought the wreath when Mercedes and Benz merged in the 1920s. The ring around the tristar was patented in 1923.

— BMW’s circle with blue and white quadrants is an interpretation of the image of a spinning propeller, powerfully simple as an early airline poster and suggesting the company’s beginnings in building aircraft engines.

— Alfa Romeo hails back to the city arms of Milan and the 12th-century bishop who bestowed them.

— Porsche borrowed arms from the city of Stuttgart, where it located its headquarters.

— Ferrari’s rearing stallion has roots in insignia of World War I Italian fighter. Citroen’s chevrons come from stylized gear teeth.

— Volkswagen’s iconic buttressing of V and W was the creation of an engineer named Franz Reimspiess, the same man who perfected the engine for the Beetle in the 1930s. He won fifty marks in an office competition to do the job. Before WWII, when the car was still Hitler’s “Strength through Joy” car the logo was surrounded by the gear-shaped emblem of the German Labor Front that built it.

— In reviving the super luxury Maybach brand of the 1920s, when it was favored by maharjas and marquis, Mercedes updated an almost Wiener Secession-looking “M.”

— Some logos evolve but, like Time Warner’s infamous “IUD,” are abandoned in favor of their predecessors. In the 1980s Fiat supplanted its prewar, wreathed emblem in favor of a Scrabble piece letter logo. The story goes that Fiat design chief Mario Maioli was driving past the company’s Mirafiori factory one night in 1982 during a power outage. He noted a neon sign outlined against the dark sky, bearing the letters FIAT and was inspired to sketch a new logo.

— Audi’s four rings have nothing to do with the Olympics but represent the juncture of four earlier German auto companies in 1932. Horch, DKW, Wanderer and Audi were forced to ally by depressed market conditions to form Auto Union. After the war, the company finally took the name Audi, which is Latin for “I hear,” a translation of the name of August Horch, founder of the company that bore his name, but kept the Auto Union rings.

— Best H logo. Hummer dealerships are built around a giant “H” that functions as both entrance and supergraphic visible from highways. But the best H logo was that of Horch, the prewar German company that enjoyed a status not unlike Buick in the U.S. Its H was formed to suggest the gateway of a city or castle—an image of sturdy tradition.

— Coolest recent logo: Subaru’s five star logo refers obscurely to the keiretsu joined together in the parent company Fuji Heavy Industry. But this the new high-performance road rally inspired Sti model (for Subaru Technology) arrived with a hot pink and high (graphic) fashion logo on its horn button, side panels, radiator and two or three more places. The parallel looping lines of the Sti logo suggest hip retro graphics such as old American basketball association expansion team emblems or the recent logo for the band OK Go by Stefan Sagmeister.

## 50/50: The 50 Biggest Changes in the Last 50 Years

### _American Heritage,_ October 2004, pp. 11–13

“I can’t imagine how we lived without it.” So we often say about an innovation that has changed our lives. But about the changes that have been most deeply absorbed into the pores of daily routine, we could also often say, “I can’t _remember_ how we lived without it.”

My finger no longer retains the muscle memory of a rotary dial phone. I can no longer remember walking over to a television set to change the channel. When I think of slipping into the back seat of my father’s Oldsmobile, I falsely remember fastening a seat belt. Old television shows are magically remembered in color, and when I recall typing college term papers in the early 1970s, I do so on a click-clacking plastic computer keyboard rather than a massive metal Royal.

Such distortions may be the very definition of what has changed the world most. The year 1954 saw the arrival of the first solar cells, developed at Bell Labs. Boeing was testing a prototype of the 707, the intercontinental jet airliner that would so change patterns of travel and consumption. Elvis was cutting his first records. And computers were just starting to be connected by telephone lines in the creation of the Cold War SAGE air defense system. The broader implications of that development were hardly imagined.

The impact of some innovations, such as jet planes, has been striking in its predictability. But small innovations have wrought large and unexpected changes in daily life too. Here are enough innovations, large and small, to count on all 10 of what used to be called digits—your fingers.

#### 1. Getting the Dish: The Power of the Satellite

It was all there in Arthur C. Clarke’s famous article “Extra-Terrestrial Relays” in _Wireless World_ magazine in October 1945. Inspired by the discovery of German V2 rockets, which he believed could serve as boosters, Clarke proposed launching earth satellites into geosynchronous orbit to handle radio, telephone, and television communications. By 1962 Telstar was beaming TV images between Europe and the United States.

Clarke understood that building ground networks no longer made economic sense, a truth realized as countries all over the Third World leap-frogged straight to wireless phones and satellite TV. The echoes of that article are still resonating in such events as Rupert Murdoch’s installation as the TV baron of China. Satellite phones remain challenged by cost and power demands, but their potential impact was illustrated a few years ago by the poignant final moments of a trapped Mount Everest climber phoning his wife with his last words and more recently by the pixelated pictures from the Iraqi war front generated by satellite phones.

In the western North Carolina valley where my ancestors lived for a century and a half, television reception was long limited by the mountains, and the population was too poor and too sparse to justify investment by cable companies. My cousins and neighbors could see only two fuzzy channels before the arrival of the TV satellite dish. But then this area of Appalachia quickly came to have a remarkably high number of dishes. Now the mountaineers can keep up with gossip about Hollywood stars as easily as with that about their cousins in the valley.

#### 2. The Silicon Frontier: Technology as Manifest Destiny

We’ve all heard by now of Moore’s Law, the dictum laid down by the Intel cofounder Gordon Moore in 1965 that holds that the number of transistors and therefore the capacity of a silicon chip must rise exponentially. The Intel 8088 processor in the first IBM PC had 29,000 transistors. Today’s Pentium 4 has up to 178 million.

The importance of Moore’s Law, however, lies not just in what chips have done better and better—like running automobile engines more efficiently, regulating the browning of toast, and printing professional-looking flyers for the high school dance—but also in the pace at which their power has advanced, as relentlessly as did the frontier in the nineteenth century. Because of this, marketing and sales staffs have been able to set up a steady pattern of declining prices and new fashions in technology. “Adoption curves” have shot upward on the chart of time. Today’s cutting-edge device for the “early adopter” is tomorrow’s, or even today’s, strip-mall commodity.

Technical advances just over the horizon are like the empty lands of the nineteenth century. Exploitation of the manifest destiny of silicon has reinforced all the patterns of the Old West: speculation, competition, shootouts, and boomtowns and ghost towns.

#### 3. Laser “Lite”

For those of us who grew up on the promise of the laser as a powerful ray gun, slicing up steel plate and boring holes through stone, the unexpected turn has been instead the spread of the low-power, low-cost laser.

It comes as no surprise that Boeing wants to mount anti-missile lasers on jets, but it’s astonishing that the soldier in the field can pick out targets with his red laser pointer—and the regional sales manager can target data on his PowerPoint presentation with a pocket-size version of the same thing. We might have guessed that lasers would reshaped the corneas of the myopic, but who would have anticipated the laser in a $30 device at the local Wal-Mart playing music or movies from discs?

#### 4. Pumping Calories: The Heat Pump

At Seaside, the planned town in the Florida Panhandle built in the 1970s to elaborate the ideas of the New Urbanism, the architecture melds old Charleston galleries with bungalows and farmhouses in an American village so archetypical it was used as the backdrop for the film _The Truman Show_. Picket fences are required by town ordinance. But look behind the fence of the majority of houses in Seaside, and you’ll encounter the jarring sight of a mechanical minitower—a heat pump.

The heat pump changed Everytown, U.S.A., and helped create what we began in the early 1970s to call the Sunbelt. The device was developed just after World War II by Professor Carl Nielsen of Ohio State University and an engineer named J. Donald Kroeker, whose engineering firm installed the first commercial unit in the Equitable Building in Portland, Oregon, in 1948. Heat pumps were soon to be found in motels across America. Basically air conditioners that can be reversed to provide low-demand heating systems, they made life tolerable in the Sunbelt, and at low cost. The heat pump removed the need for radiators or vented-air heat in much of the southern half of the country while supplanting the window-installed air-conditioning unit. It has flourished everywhere cooling is more important than heating and has supported our national dependence on low energy prices to make life sustainable in our fastest-growing areas.

#### 5. The End of the Blues? The Mechanical Cotton Picker

The mechanical cotton picker killed Broadway, believes Jimmy Breslin. By driving poor blacks off the fields of the South to “Trailways and Greyhound bus depots for the long ride to New York City,” he argues, it sent blacks moving “into the tenements that were vacated by the whites,” who themselves moved to the suburbs and abandoned Times Square. “Broadway would no longer be the place of guys and dolls.”

The migration of African-Americans north and west out of the South is the greatest in American history, larger than that from the Dust Bowl to California. Cotton-picking machinery, pioneered in the 1930s by the brothers John and Mack Rust, was mature by the late 1940s, but not until 1960 was a majority of the cotton crop harvested by machine.

The cotton picker soon became a key focus for historians studying the interaction of social and technological forces. The debate is charted in _The Second Great Emancipation: The Mechanical Cotton Picker, Black Migration, and How They Shaped the Modern South_, by Donald Holley. Did the migration of workers out of the South trigger the adoption of the picker and push the maturation of its technology? Or did the machine displace the workers? Did the appeal of greater freedom and prosperity in the rest of the country pull people off the land and into cities? Or did the disappearance of an agricultural society create a classic displaced proletariat?

What is not in doubt are the consequences: The growth of frequently depressed inner-city neighborhoods and expanding suburban ones, and the transformation of the blues, in its new homes in Chicago and elsewhere, into rock ’n’ roll and hip-hop.

#### 6. Bar Codes and the Universal Product Code

Scanning your own groceries and avoiding the gum-chewing gossiping checkout girl may be worth it for you, but it’s even more worth it for the supermarket, with its just-in-time inventory. Much of America’s recent productivity growth has been built on new sets of standards and means of marking products. The bar code is the most visible example of this.

The Universal Product Code was the first bar-code symbology widely adopted, endorsed by the grocery industry in 1973. Product coding allows for quick price changes and has abetted the growth of the big-box discount store. Items can be tracked from port to rail to loading dock to shelf, thanks to containerized shipping that uses the codes. The consequence is lowered living costs.

Bar codes are just one of many industry standardizations that have lowered costs and changed life. The American home has doubled in average square footage thanks in large part to standardized building materials (4-by-8-foot gypsum board and plywood, 2-by-4 studs 16 inches apart). Electronics is built on standards such as Windows compatibility, VHS, DVD, and so on. Coded product standards even rule the food in our kitchens. A banana that was once just a Chiquita is now a #4011.

#### 7. Buckle Up: The Automobile Seat Belt

Can you recall a car without a seat belt? The movement to put seat belts in the car began in 1954, when the American Medical Association first recommended them. Ford and Chrysler began to offer them as options a year later. By 1965 they were standard.

The push by safety advocates to require seat belts helped establish the adversarial relationship between government and the automobile industry, which was accelerated by the Clean Air Act of 1970. Detroit grumbled, but the engineering achievement involved in developing the catalytic converter and the air bag, both of which Detroit argued were impractical, suggested that under pressure industry could do far more than it thought. For historians, the story indicated how effective “force fed” technology, demanded by government, could be. For philosophers, it challenged John Stuart Mill’s classic liberal precept that government should not protect the individual from himself. Harley-riding libertarians, agreeing with Mill, have forced a rollback of mandatory helmet laws in some states. Will belt laws be unbuckled next?

#### 8. Seeking Heat: The TV Remote Control

Today’s children watch television in a wholly different way from those of the 1950s. The remote control makes television an environment to be moved through, not a schedule of successive programs. The result is grab-’em-quick programming and short attention spans. Once families clustered together to watch Ed Sullivan. Now a program waited for and seen straight through is the exception rather than the rule.

While scientists at the remote Naval Ordnance Test Center at China Lake were developing infrared heat-seeking guidance for the Sidewinder air-to-air missile in the early 1950s, TV designers were struggling to find a way to change channels from a distance. The first remote control, still wired to the set, bore the apt name Lazy Bone. In 1955 a Zenith engineer named Eugene Polley did away with the wire; his Flash-matic used light, but it didn’t work very well, so it was replaced by the Space Command, which relied on ultrasound—frequencies beyond the range of the human ear. The sounds were generated mechanically in a system that was part chime, part tuning fork, because batteries were inadequate to power a wireless electric ultrasound system.

Not until the 1980s did cheap and dependable infrared technology take over. Today 99 percent of all TV sets come with remote controls, and restless fingers seek hot new stars unceasingly.

#### 9. . . . And Going and Going: Better Batteries

We forget how much bigger and slower our portable devices used to be. Remote controls and mobile phones and Game Boys have become possible only with improvements in batteries. Hefty boom boxes are loaded with companies of chunky C cells, but hearing aids, watches, and automobile key fobs contain tiny button batteries that often outlast the devices they power. The change began with the introduction of alkaline and nickel-cadmium cells in the 1960s. Later decades saw nickel metal hydrides and then lithium produce order-of-magnitude extensions in battery life. But there have been tradeoffs. Most of the substances that make the best batteries are environmental hazards. Nickel, mercury, cadmium, and other heavy metals tossed into landfills and incinerators are among the most dangerous sources of pollutants. And while cell phones can remain on standby for weeks, running a laptop for a whole airline flight across the United States remains a challenge. The hope? That in the future miniature fuel cells will replace batteries altogether.

#### 10. Scoop! The French Fry Is King

In 1954 the first TV dinner arrived. It was a turkey- and-dressing meal packaged in a segmented foil tray in a box printed up to look like a television screen. Frozen industrialized dinners heated in the home kitchen looked like the culinary future. But in 1955 Ray Kroc began the national franchising of McDonald’s and signaled a different pattern, the industrialization of the restaurant kitchen, with machinery and methods allowing the use of untrained labor. More and more meals would be eaten outside the home as standardized chains spread.

Kroc’s kitchen engineer, James Schindler, first broke down the burger production system, the way Henry Ford had broken down auto manufacturing. Then he refined it, the way Toyota had with its just-in-time automaking. Nothing better exemplified the system than the engineer Ralph Weimer’s fry scoop, a metal device that, when slipped onto a waxed bag, measured out an order of fries with a single unskilled swipe.

McDonald’s success has turned less on burgers than on fries, and the fries in turn have depended on a whole supporting infrastructure. As critical to McDonald’s as Ray Kroc himself was the spud king J. R. Simplot, who produced Idaho russets with just the right water and sugar content for proper caramelizing in cooking fat with just a touch of beef lard added. And the potatoes created by a vast growing, freezing, and transportation network end up in the hands of the worker wielding the scoop.

The scoop is an apt symbol of the power of the franchise itself, the business-in-a-box approach that has sprinkled monad-like restaurants and clothing stores across America and the world in the last half-century. What McDonald’s pioneered has been carried out by Starbucks and the Gap and other chains. The colored signal lights that regulate restaurant machinery, the step-by-step photos on training charts in fast-food kitchens, and the just-in-time shelf arrangements at Gap stores—all are exact counterparts of elements in modern automobile factories.

In the franchise nothing is left to chance—or to sheer stupidity. Not long ago, after happily munching our Roy Rogers burgers, we smoothed out the wrapper to discover a small circle printed on its interior. Inside the circle were printed the words PLACE SANDWICH HERE.

> I remember Phil chuckling all through the editing of this piece. It was his perfect subject—a retro prefab with a dose of science-fiction.

> —Michael Cannell

## Futuro Flashback: The Prefab from Another Planet

### _New York Times,_ July 28, 2005, p. F1

Richard Pisani caught his first glimpse of a Futuro house beside a lake in Illinois in the early 1980s, outlined against the setting sun. “I was just out cruising and there it was in some subdivision,” Mr. Pisani said, “like a prop from a sci-fi movie.”

For the next 15 years, he saw the house often, and could not get its flying-saucer form out of his mind. Finally, in 1997, he bought it, paying a tenth of the $20,000 asking price. Using a flatbed truck, he moved it to the yard behind his house in nearby Danvers, Ill., and turned it into a media room.

In the process, he joined a growing network of Futuro owners and fans who have dedicated themselves to celebrating and preserving this strange prefabricated house, which looks like it came not just from an earlier decade, but even from another planet. By 2004, in fact, he had become one of the world’s foremost authorities on the fate of the Futuros, numbering perhaps as many as 100, that were built between 1968 and 1978.

The circular house, 11 feet high and 26 feet across, was designed by Matti Suuronen, a Finnish architect, in 1968. A hatch door in its lower half opened down to reveal steps, like the door of a small airplane, and led into a room outfitted with six plastic bed-chair combinations and a central fireplace slab, as well as a kitchenette and a bathroom. Photographs from the time make the house look like a place where the Teletubbies might live, with Barbarella as a frequent houseguest.

Mika Taanila, a Finnish filmmaker who helped start the Futuro revival with his 1998 documentary _Futuro: A New Stance for Tomorrow_, said he became interested in the houses because they seemed to represent the mood of the late 1960s so precisely. They reflected the era’s “economic boom and optimism about the future,” he said in a telephone interview from Finland. “Suuronen could not have come up with the idea 15 years earlier or 10 years later.”

Part of that optimism was about the potential for plastics and prefabrication to radically lower the cost of housing, in the revolutionary spirit of 1968. The Futuro, which was made of polyester plastic and fiberglass and which sold in the United States for between $12,000 and $14,000, was one of many experimental plastic houses at the time. It came in 16 pieces that could easily be moved by truck or helicopter and set up in a couple of days.

But the house has captured contemporary imaginations more for its look than for its idealistic history. It embodies a strain of modernism that can be seen either as visionary or kitschy, but that certainly stands apart from the sober elegance of much mid-century modern design. Owners of surviving Futuros typically decorate them with lava lamps, plastic chairs and 1970s television sets shaped like spacesuit helmets.

“The persistence of this sort of vision of the future is amazing,” said Christopher Mount, the director of exhibitions and public programs at the Parsons School of Design, who has curated several shows on Scandinavian design. “This was a vision that included Panton furniture and _2001: A Space Odyssey_, orange plastic and silver jump suits,” Mr. Mount said. “You could look at the Futuro house as a giant Panton chair.”

Mr. Pisani, who sells and installs home gutters, became fascinated with Futuros, and began researching their history after he bought his own.

“It made me feel good to know that it wasn’t just some oddball piece of junk but part of a serious attempt at mass housing,” he said.

Last year, he set up a Web site, futuro-house.net, to find and document all the surviving Futuros in the world. He estimates that there are about 60, in various states of repair and disrepair.

The list of confirmed and suspected Futuro locations on Mr. Pisani’s Web site has grown as word about the site has spread. The country with the most Futuros seems to be New Zealand, with about a dozen. Several have been noted along the coasts of both Carolinas, and there are Futuros in the vastness of west Texas. One, in Pensacola, Fla., survived Hurricane Ivan “because of the aerodynamics of flying saucers,” Mr. Pisani said.

Mr. Pisani’s own Futuro has become something of a tourist destination. In the summer, leaves hide it from passers-by on nearby streets, but in the winter, thanks to increasing awareness of the Futuro, visitors often seek out his home at inconvenient times. “Last Christmas,” he recalled, “some crazy guy came roaring up my driveway—at 2:30 in the morning.”

Mr. Suuronen, who now lives in retirement outside Helsinki, built the first Futuro as a vacation house for a friend. He never planned on mass production, but the attention the house attracted led the Finnish company Polykem to market the design in 1968. Leonard Fruchter, a Philadelphia developer, bought the American licensing rights and began making them in the United States the next year.

The houses quickly attracted attention. An article in the _New York Times_ on the day of the first moon landing announced the Futuro’s arrival in America (or “on Earth,” as the headline put it). _Playboy_ magazine featured a Futuro as a bachelor pad in a photo layout.

In Europe, the Swedish air force bought several Futuros to house technicians at remote radar stations, and the Soviet government contracted to purchase several more to help meet the needs of the planned 1980 Olympics. But the oil shocks of 1973, which sent the price of plastic skyrocketing, along with changing fashions, helped put a stop to the growth of the Futuro’s market. Polykem stopped making the houses in 1978.

Then, in the early 1990s, the Futuro began its comeback, when European artists started using the houses in installations. In 1998, Mika Taanila brought out his film, and four years later he and a co-author, Marko Home, published a coffee table book, _Futuro: Tomorrow’s House from Yesterday_ (Desura, 2002).

“I still get quite a lot of e-mail, mostly from people who would like to buy one,” said Mr. Taanila. “Do I know any that are for sale? Some wonder if production might be restarted.”

Mr. Suuronen, now in his early 70s, could not be reached for this article. But Marko Tandefelt, the project director and curator at the Finnish Cultural Institute in New York, said that the architect is a bit perplexed by the renewed fame of his creation.

Mr. Taanila says that Mr. Suuronen, whom he speaks to from time to time, is also happy. “He is very flattered and surprised because this is a totally new generation interested in his idea. But he is also puzzled what to do with all this newborn interest.”

(image: 7-25-92 #3_StarWars.jpg)

##### Patton notebook, July 25–August 15, 1992

> Always in tune with pop culture, Phil looked for the stories behind the scenes, like how the cars of Pixar’s _Cars_ were designed.

> —James Cobb

(image: NYT_PixarsCarsGotItsKicksonRoute66_21MAY2006-1.jpg)

##### The stars of “Cars”: Doc Hudson, a retired racer, left, and Lightning McQueen.

## Pixar’s ‘Cars’ Got Its Kicks on Route 66

### _New York Times,_ May 21, 2006, p. AU4

The cars of _Cars_, the animated Pixar film that opens nationally on June 9, were designed on Route 66.

But not entirely—they were also designed at Pixar’s headquarters in Emeryville, Calif., where 800 animators and other dreamers work on 3,000 computers inside a former fruit processing plant. But to hear Michael Wallis, a historian of the highways, tell it, they were inspired by research expeditions to racetracks, styling studios and car shows.

Inspiration also flowed from the ruins of a Packard plant on East Grand Boulevard in Detroit and from the Detroit Institute of Arts, with its car-factory murals by Diego Rivera—and from what’s left of Route 66, the legendary artery through the heart of the American Dream.

A tour guide and author of _Route 66: The Mother Road_, among other books, Mr. Wallis led the Pixar crew along Route 66.

The most lovable character in _Cars_ is Mater, a rusty tow truck with the voice of Larry the Cable Guy. That’s Mater, as in “Tow-Mater,” an aptly cornball pun. Mr. Wallis recalls the time and place he was created. “There was an old wrecker in an empty lot by Route 66 in Galena, Kan.,” he said. “Joe Ranft, the studio’s head of story and a key member of the Pixar team, stopped and noticed it, and Mater was born.”

Mr. Wallis acted as a consultant for the Pixar team: Mr. Ranft; John Lasseter, the director; and other top animators.

Just as auto designers have produced cars that come close to cartoons—think of the gangsteresque Chrysler PT Cruiser or the pull-toy Volkswagen New Beetle—cartoon designers have turned to creating cars.

It is not as easy as it seems, Mr. Lasseter said. In January 2005, he came to the Detroit auto show and spoke about his project at the AutoWeek Design Forum. The crucial decision, he said, was to forgo the usual idea of the “face” of a car, with the headlights serving as the eyes and the grille as the mouth. He moved the eyes to the windshield to keep the cars from looking empty and driverless.

The team took constant pains “to keep the cars from looking rubbery,” Mr. Lasseter said. Much effort and computer-processing power went into rendering realistically shifting reflections on the cars’ metal surfaces, from the rust of old trucks to the metal-flake custom cars, using a computer technique called ray tracing.

The release of _Cars_ was delayed seven months during the negotiations that led to Disney’s recent purchase of Pixar for $7.4 billion in stock. The formal premiere is Friday on four giant screens erected on Turn 2 of Lowe’s Motor Speedway near Charlotte, N.C. That location is courtesy of Humpy Wheeler, president and general manager of the speedway and Nascar’s éminence grise, who provides the movie voice of Tex, a 1959 Cadillac Coupe de Ville with long horns above his grille. Richard Petty, the racing legend, also has a speaking role.

The cars tend to types. George Carlin plays Fillmore, a VW bus whose front license plate suggests a beatnik’s goatee. Sarge is a Jeep, Flo a waitress (inspired, Mr. Wallis says, by a real waitress, Dawn Welch, at the Rock Café in Stroud, Okla.). A 1957 Motorama show car, Flo boasts (through chrome lips) of selling “the best gas in 50 states.” Ramone, the ’59 Chevy Impala lowrider, has the voice of Cheech Marin, the stoner comedian. The more you know about cars and car movies the richer the viewing experience. Paul Newman gives voice to Doc Hudson, a wise retired racer turned mechanic. It helps if you know that the Hudson Hornet, for which the Pixar team dug up vintage paint chips to assure realism, was once a Nascar racer and that Newman acted in a film called _Hud_. Yes, the car has blue eyes.

The sheriff of Radiator Springs is a 1949 Mercury, and its voice is Mr. Wallis’s. The author is delighted with his role. “That car has always been one of my favorites, and it fits my personality,” he said.

Mr. Lasseter recounted how the idea for the film was born in the summer of 2000 when, exhausted after nearly a decade of work on films like _Toy Story_ and _Monsters, Inc._, he decided to take a cross-country road trip with his wife and five sons.

A large man habitually garbed in a capacious Hawaiian shirt—a look that suggests a perpetual fantasy vacation—Mr. Lasseter is the son of a onetime Chevrolet parts manager in Whittier, Calif. He had long wanted to make a film about the car culture.

When he returned to the studio from his vacation, he plunged into the new project. One of the first things he did was contact Mr. Wallis, who led the Pixar animators on two trips across Route 66 to research the film. Bypassed by Interstate 40 and other modern highways, Route 66—the pieces that remain—has been reborn as a tourist road. Real motels and restaurants served as models for those in Radiator Springs, like the Cozy Cone Motel and V-8 Cafe.

“They saw the teepee-shaped motels and gas stations,” Mr. Wallis said in the rawhide tones he uses on his road tours. “They felt the wind through the winter wheat. They gulped it all in.”

The film follows its hero, Lightning McQueen, a Corvettelike racer with the voice of Owen Wilson, as it travels the racing circuit from town to town, combining the narrative device of the road trip with bursts of action. But the racecar gets sidetracked in Radiator Springs.

“He’s speedy and arrogant,” Mr. Wallis said. “In our bypassed town we teach him to slow down. In turn, he inspires us to rebuild our town.”

Mr. Wallis, along with his wife, Suzanne Fitzgerald Wallis, also wrote a book about the making of the film. The lush pastel and color pencil sketches in _The Art of Cars_ (Chronicle, $40) show that Pixar’s ideas have roots in the hand, not just in the computer. Sketches by Nat McLaughlin for flowers in the film—their blossoms shaped like taillights—are works of art.

Mr. Lasseter and his group visited design studios for the Big Three automakers in Detroit but particularly hit it off with J Mays, the Ford Motor Company’s group vice president for design. “We are on the same wavelength,” Mr. Mays said.

He said he admired the cars in _The Incredibles_, another Pixar film, because they showed knowledge of auto history and design.

He and Mr. Lasseter bonded and exchanged studio visits. Mr. Lasseter learned how real cars are designed. Mr. Mays was impressed with Pixar’s obsessive attention to detail. “They want to get things right even if no one can tell,” he said. “If it was wrong, they would know.”

The _Cars_ cars are more sophisticated than those in _The Incredibles_. Computers used for the new film are four times as fast as those, and 1,000 times as fast as the ones for _Toy Story_. What gives the cars character is the way they move on their wheels, like creatures on feet.

Of course, designing cars for computer animation is not designing for the real world, but it has similarities. To orchestrate the motion, Pixar used a shared platform, a system not unlike a real carmaker’s. The film’s cars have a common software “chassis,” a “universal rig” of 100 animation controls known as avars. Suspensions are customized: the 50s cars are looser and bouncier.

Pixar had to design a whole landscape. In a world of cars, Mr. Lasseter explained, “a restaurant is a gas station and a doctor is a mechanic.” The town of Radiator Springs includes a tire (shoe) store run by Luigi, a Fiat with a hairpiece whose voice is that of Tony Shalhoub of the television series _Monk_.

For Route 66, Mr. Wallis loaded the animators into rented white Cadillacs. “We rode three big new Detroit sleds,” he said. The animators decorated the cars by attaching items found on the roadside: sheaves of wheat, bunches of thistles, sunflowers, snake skins and a road-kill armadillo. “We called this stuff Okie hood ornaments,” Mr. Wallis said.

At trip’s end, he said, “We buried it all in the high desert,” adding: “We had a ceremony. I spoke some words and one of the animators, Bud Luckey, played a few bars on his harmonica. I’ll never forget it.”

> Phil and I bonded over automotive design. At global auto shows and press events, he generously shared his knowledge and insights with me, decoding both the visual and the verbal cues, and a lasting friendship blossomed. With this piece, reminiscent of those conversations years ago, Phil deciphered the colorful lexicon of the automotive designer, emphasizing its conflation of form and language and its parallel references to the human body. This is the only primer one needs to distinguish D.R.G. from D.L.O.

> —Wendi Parson

## Body Language: How to Talk the Designers’ Talk

### _New York Times,_ April 1, 2007, p. AU1

Never say dashboard, not if you want people at the auto show to think you know what you are talking about. Say I.P., for instrument panel, as designers do.

Dropping in a mention of the greenhouse or the beltline is pretty easy, but you will really get points with casual references to A-, B-, and C-pillars, the order of the roof supports arranged from the windshield, whose base is called the cowl, to the rear window, or backlight. You might say, “That fat C-pillar would make it impossible to parallel park.”

Every profession has its lingo. A list of common terms—and a few of the most colorful ones—can come in handy. With cars, words and metal share territory: each brand’s vocabulary of shapes is collectively known as its design language.

The _beltline_ divides the _greenhouse_, or glassed-in upper body, from the portion that extends down from the window sills. Equally important is the _A-line_, said Michael Castiglione, principal exterior designer at DaimlerChrysler’s Pacifica studio in Carlsbad, Calif. The A-line runs the length of the body from headlight to taillight, tracing the car’s silhouette. The car may also have a _character line_, a crease formed in the sheet metal of the sides.

Vehicles are said to have _styling cues_ that prompt viewers to recognize models by their resemblance to other family members—a brand’s characteristic shapes and flourishes, the form of its grille or the arc of the roofline.

Cumulatively, they make up the _D.R.G._, or _down-the-road graphic_ of a car, the visual signature of a quickly glimpsed vehicle that should make it recognizable as a Cadillac or a Ford. At the extreme, think Volkswagen New Beetle. D.R.G. is not to be confused with D.L.O., for daylight opening, the total area of the window glass.

The angle of the windshield is known as its _rake_—an extreme tilt is said to be fast—while the inward angle of the side greenhouse windows is called the _tumblehome_.

The body section below the base of the door, or rocker panel, is treated with a varying degree of _turn-under_, which Chris Chapman of BMW’s Designworks studio in Newbury Park, Calif., defines as the shape of the panel as it curves inward at the lower edge. The front face of a car is visually grounded in the lower fascia or valance, typically made of plastic these days.

_Stance_ is critical to the character a car projects, and its aggressiveness is frequently noted by designers in their presentations at new-model unveilings. The term refers to the way the body sits on the wheels, with energy—or not.

Robert Boniface, director of advanced design for General Motors, recently worked on the Chevrolet Volt and Camaro show cars. He said that “stance has to do with the relative visual stability or instability of a particular design.”

Cars with good stance are often referred to as being _planted_; small wheels and a wide upper body give a car a poor stance. Being planted lends a sense of sure- footedness to the design. Too high a stance can suggest standing on tiptoe, a tentative look.

One critical element, designers said, is the _axle-to-dash ratio_, the proportion between the front wheel and the cowl (which is the base of the windshield). It helps to define the visual personality of the car.

Another important relationship, according to Bryan Thompson, a car designer at the Nissan Design America studio in La Jolla, Calif., is that between glass and body. “A vehicle whose body is relatively thick compared to the amount of glass is called _chunky_,” he said.

The proportion between wheel and body sizes is important in lending a vehicle its visual personality. “Wheel-to-body is the relationship of the wheel-tire plane to the sheet metal wheel opening,” Mr. Thompson said. “Wheels that are flush to the body are desirable. Wheels that are well inboard of the sheet metal plane are buried. Vehicles with buried wheels are called _overbodied_.”

At its extreme, an _overbodied_ car has the look of a parade float, with the body visually overpowering the wheels, Mr. Thompson said. The distinctive “bathtub” Nashes of the early 1950s suffered this trait.

There is also what is called the _roller skate effect_, where the wheels and tires are too small for the body. (Volkswagens of the 1980s seemed to have especially small wheels proportionally, and fell prey to this phenomenon.) Huge wheels of 20, 22 or 23 inches, by contrast, make a vehicle look tough.

The space between wheel and surrounding fender or wheel well suggests the _jounce_ of the car. The intervening space between tire and wheel well is sometimes called the _dead cat hole_, according to Peter Davis, director of interior design for global compact utility vehicles at G.M.

More colorful and less formal terms come in handy in the studio. Mr. Davis supplied _rat holes_, which, he said, were the “small unwanted, usually triangular holes that result from parts coming together.”

Now that designers often move around the globe, their language has become more eclectic. Earlier in his career, Mr. Davis worked in Europe for Fiat and G.M. In Germany, he learned _gummidingers_, a name for rubber thingamajigs that have no name. Mr. Davis defined the British-sounding _mucketts_ as “complicated rubber moldings that hide nasty window-door frame areas or direct water drips to appropriate places.”

“In Italy,” he said, “what we call the _plenum_, the area at the base of the windshield where the wipers sit and run off is directed is called the _vasca di pesce_, or fish bowl.”

Companies have their own phrase books. At BMW, a crease or body line on the side of a car is a _zicke_, Mr. Chapman said. For New Yorkers, Mr. Chapman noted that the often-used _Hofmeister Knick,_ referring to the traditional dogleg shape at the base of the C-pillar of BMWs, “is pronounced _ka-nic_, not like the basketball team.”

The shape is named for Wilhelm Hofmeister, a BMW designer in the 1960s; _knick_ is German for fold or crease.

A line can be _dead_ or _sweet_. To _sweeten_ a line, Mr. Thompson of Nissan said, a designer might give a crease or chamfer a lead-in to enliven a line that is otherwise static or dead. “To _lead-in_ means to construct lines or surfaces in a less geometric manner, with a little more grace,” he said.

William Chergosky, project chief designer at Toyota’s Calty design studio in Newport Beach, Calif., once worked at Chrysler with Bryan Nesbitt, who designed the PT Cruiser and is now head of G.M.’s European studio. “We had a term we used together,” Mr. Chergosky said. “_M.B.G._—_more better good_, which would be scrawled on a drawing or a clay model.” It meant, Mr. Chergosky added: “This pleases me. Do more of it.”

> Finding design anywhere, even along America’s lonesome, neglected highways, Phil tapped into a spirit of rediscovery.

> —James Cobb

## The Virtues of Avoiding Interstates

### _New York Times,_ August 5, 2007, p. AU2

The chef Alice Waters and other foodies talk about “slow food” as an antidote to fast food.

Now many connoisseurs of the highway are championing the use of slow roads—back roads with scenery and history—instead of faceless Interstates. The idea emphasizes savoring local detail and culture.

“Taking the slow road is the best way to taste and feel the country, to use all your senses,” said Michael Wallis, author of _The Lincoln Highway: Coast to Coast from Times Square to the Golden Gate_, with photographs by Michael S. Williamson (W. W. Norton, 2007).

“Heritage travel is real,” said Mr. Wallis, reached on his way to Flossmoor, Ill., as part of a cross-country book tour chronicled at lincolnhighwaybook.com. “Shunpiking is real,” he said, using an old term for avoiding toll roads.

The slow roaders favor back roads, parkways, motels and diners, instead of chain lodging and food.

Mr. Wallis contrasts making time and having a time, and the traveler and the tourist, as symbols of the fast road and the slow road.

While people collect antique cars, there has been little interest in antique roads—until recently. Over the last decade, preservationists have begun to include old roads, along with old buildings and old gardens, in the list of things to be saved. Call them heirloom highways, curving, twisting roads sometimes requiring slow, patient driving.

Saving slow roads and the sights along them has recently become a preservationist mission. In June, the National Trust for Historic Preservation named the motels of Route 66 from Illinois to California to its list of America’s 11 Most Endangered Historic Places.

The World Monuments Watch has also placed the Mother Road, as Route 66 is known, on its 2008 endangered list, right up there with sites like the Teuchitlán-Guachimontones archaeological zone in Mexico. The group calls Route 66 “an iconic getaway route” and “a pilgrimage route for modern travelers.”

Some famous slow roads are showing signs of revival. Derelict motels have been restored and reopened, and neon has been replaced. The famed Blue Swallow Motel on Route 66 in Tucumcari, N.M., has a new owner and new paint. A federal law to provide money to help preserve and promote Route 66 was passed several years ago.

Preferring the slow road—the byway, the back road—has a long tradition, of course. The author William Least Heat-Moon in his book from the early 1980s, _Blue Highways: A Journey into America_, called the back roads blue highways because they were blue on the map, in contrast to the red of modern divided highways.

In 1991, the federal Transportation Department introduced the National Scenic Byways Program, which marked and promoted roads, largely to help tourism, and many states have added their own efforts. (A list of the byways and “All American roads” is at byways.org.)

The film _Cars_ from last summer contrasted the Interstates and back roads as two wholly different ways of life: the former hurried and inhuman, the latter sensitive and slow. Hollywood’s vision of the Tao read “life begins at the off ramp.”

The first slow roads were parkways. The parkway was the invention of Frederick Law Olmsted, creator of Central Park. Carriages rolled along amid greenery on Eastern Parkway and Ocean Parkway in Brooklyn. The first motor parkway was the Bronx River Parkway. The Hudson, Taconic and Saw Mill Parkways in New York are other examples.

The parkway concept was expanded with motor roads like the Skyline Drive in Virginia and the Blue Ridge Parkway in North Carolina, built mostly in the 1930s. Scenery and history are combined in the Natchez Trace Parkway, paralleling the old migrant trail in Tennessee and Mississippi.

But preserving scenic and historical roads was an afterthought to a culture widening, and paving over, most of its old roads in the ’50s though the ’70s. Paul Daniel Marriott, a landscape architect, organized a conference on historical roads for the National Trust for Historic Preservation in 1998. The conference became a biennial event; next year it will be in Albuquerque, close to the intersection of El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro and Route 66.

Mr. Marriott emphasized the scenic, historical and tourist potential of these roads. The conference explored making historical roads safe for modern traffic, while saving their appeal as history.

“People are appreciating historic roads more and more,” Mr. Marriott said. “It used to just be Route 66, but now you hear people mention the Yellowstone Trail, the Dixie Highway and El Camino Real. People are looking at specific roads with specific purposes.”

It is hard to update older roads, especially parkways, for safety and increased traffic without destroying their character. But the rehabbed Saw Mill River Parkway has retained the grace of its curves, and a 1798 stone bridge in Kingston, N. J., still carries traffic past a milestone marking distance to New York in one direction and Philadelphia in the other.

Much smaller efforts at promoting local tourism through roads are flourishing. Not long ago I was on Highway 20 in western Massachusetts, a lovely rural strip of pavement that signs told me was the Jacob’s Ladder Trail Scenic Byway. Along the 33 miles of the byway between Russell and Lee, Mass., I passed a restaurant and gas station whose sign read simply “EAT” and whose facade bore a classic Mobil Pegasus sign. A few miles farther, two women sat by the side of the road in folding chairs reading, beside a table full of blueberries they had picked and packed for sale that morning.

Mr. Wallis’s book, _Route 66: The Mother Road_, helped set off a vogue for that road after the book was published in 1990. He became one of the road’s best-known guides.

For Mr. Wallis, there is a close connection between slow food and slow roads. But, he said, the real finds along the slow roads are not food or nature, but people.

“Yesterday we saw one our favorite waitresses, at the Paddock in York, Pa. She’s been there about a thousand years,” he said, “and told us to call her ‘Sarge.’”

(image: 6-18-06 #2_interstates.jpg)

##### Patton notebook, June 18, 2006

> Although I always knew Phil as a “car guy,” I feel this presidential debate furniture piece speaks volumes about his work. No matter what the subject, Phil’s goal was to always make his readers aware that design is all around us and that it is an intellectually tangible medium worthy of our attention.

> —Hampton C. Wayt

(image: RTRCMB9.jpg)

##### Cheney-Edwards, 2004.

## In Debates, the Furniture Is the Message

### _New York Times,_ October 11, 2008, p. WK3

In the first televised presidential debate, John F. Kennedy looked fit and tan; Richard Nixon, with his five-o’clock shadow, looked nervous and pasty. Both showed a command of the issues, but appearances mattered.

So did the set and furniture.

The set was extremely spare. The candidates sat in Danish modern chairs conceived by Hans Wegner, the famous designer, and spoke from behind skeletal lecterns that resembled music stands and offered no place to hide.

“The whole set was extremely modern, and that gave a sense of faith in the future,” recalled Carl Magnusson, a furniture designer.

The ambiance might have helped Mr. Kennedy as much as his tan: he was billing himself as the candidate of the future.

Campaigns have learned a lot since then. The set is so critical to how a debate proceeds that they are distinguished from each other by the furniture and setting: there are the podium, table and town-hall debates.

“Set design makes an important contribution” and often dictates the ensuing dynamic of the debate, said Alan Schroeder, the author of _Presidential Debates: Fifty Years of High-Risk TV_.

“When candidates stand behind lecterns, a physical barrier is created that makes it more acceptable for the debaters to clash,” he said. “By contrast, when the candidates sit at a table, the close proximity tends to discourage either participant from going on the attack.”

The set designer Hugh Gray Raisky planned sets for debates in 1988 and 1992, with a goal, he said, “to make each candidate as presentable as possible.” But campaigns are always looking for an edge, and negotiations between candidates can get testy over set design, furniture and format.

Consider the debate leading up to the debate between President Gerald Ford and his challenger, Jimmy Carter, in 1976, as detailed by Mr. Schroeder in his book.

One issue was the hue of blue that would be used on the backdrop. Mr. Ford’s advisers worried that a darker blue might emphasize the president’s thinning hair. Mr. Ford, who had been lampooned as clumsy on _Saturday Night Live_, also wanted a bracket on his podium to secure his water glass.

In debates when Mr. Carter and the man who defeated him, Ronald Reagan, were incumbents, both argued—without success—to have the presidential seal affixed to their podiums.

Height is often an issue. Geraldine Ferraro, the 1984 Democratic vice-presidential candidate, stood on a riser behind her podium when she debated George H. W. Bush.

In this year’s race, John McCain and Barack Obama have debated twice—once standing at podiums, and, last week, in a town-hall format in which they moved about the set as they fielded questions. In their final debate on Wednesday, the two men will sit together at a table with a moderator. Will the table format discourage attacks, as it often does? Stay tuned.

#### Kennedy-Nixon, 1960

The ground rules called for the candidates to answer questions while standing. John Kennedy’s advisers thought this would benefit him because Richard Nixon was suffering from a knee injury. When Mr. Nixon shifted his weight behind the music-stand-like lectern, he gave the impression that he was ill at ease.

#### Ford-Carter, 1976

The height issue first arose in planning this debate and led to the “belt-buckle compromise,” said Alan Schroeder, a debate historian. President Gerald Ford was three and a half inches taller than Jimmy Carter, prompting the Carter camp to seek what Mr. Schroeder called “compensatory measures.” The top of the podium Mr. Ford used was two and half inches above his belt buckle; Mr. Carter’s was one and a half inches below his buckle.

#### Carter-Regan, 1980

Although President Carter was not allowed to affix the presidential seal to his podium for his single debate with Ronald Reagan, the podiums they used resembled the one use by Mr. Carter when he traveled. Mr. Reagan ended up being the beneficiary. The image of Mr. Reagan behind the lectern made him seem more presidential and less extreme, analysts said at the time. Viewers could imagine him as president.

#### Bush-Dukakis, 1988

Height again became an issue: Michael Dukakis was four inches shorter than George H. W. Bush. Contentious negotiations ensued. At one point, according to Mr. Schroeder, James A. Baker III, a top aide to Mr. Bush, asked, “What are you going to do when you have to negotiate with Gorbachev. Ask for a little platform?” In the end, the set designer, Hugh Gray Raisky, built a nearly invisible riser of laminated wood for Mr. Dukakis that became known as the “baseball mound.” It worked, until Mr. Dukakis stepped down to shake hands with Mr. Bush.

#### Clinton-Bush-Perot, 1992

This was the first of the so-called “town hall” debates in which the candidates variously sat perched on stools or roamed the set as they fielded questions from an audience in Richmond, Va. Bill Clinton suggested the format, which he had made the medium of his campaign. The format made for a less confrontational debate than might have been expected as members of the audience gently chided the candidates for not sticking to the issues.

#### Cheney-Edwards, 2004

Vice President Dick Cheney and Senator John Edwards sat in swivel chairs at a horseshoe-shaped desk. Mr. Cheney’s aides had pushed for the format, Mr. Schroeder said, because of the vice president’s familiarity with _Meet the Press_–style shows and because of his heart problems. With a table debate, Professor Schroeder said, “It doesn’t work to go after each other in a nasty personal way.” Perhaps. But the candidates went at each other anyway in what _The Times_ described as a “strikingly personal and bitter” encounter.

(image: 11-10-88 #1.jpg)

##### Patton notebook, November 10–December 31, 1988

> I had long heard about the Long Island Motor Parkway. Editing Phil’s retrospective of that road opened my eyes to its significance.

> —James Cobb

(image: limp152ba.jpg)

##### The toll started at $2 in 1908, fell to $1.50 in 1912, then $1 in 1917 before hitting 40 cents in the 1930s.

## A 100-Year-Old Dream: A Road Just for Cars

### _New York Times,_ October 12, 2008, p. AU10

It survives only as segments of other highways, as a right of way for power lines and as a bike trail, but the Long Island Motor Parkway still holds a sense of magic as what some historians say is the country’s first road built specifically for the automobile. It opened 100 years ago last Friday as a rich man’s dream.

As detailed in a new book, _The Long Island Motor Parkway_ by Howard Kroplick and Al Velocci (Arcadia Publishing), the parkway ran about 45 miles across Long Island, from Queens to Ronkonkoma, and was created by William Kissam Vanderbilt II, the great-grandson of Cornelius Vanderbilt.

The younger Vanderbilt was a car enthusiast who loved to race. He had set a speed record of 92 miles an hour in 1904, the same year he created his own race, the Vanderbilt Cup.

But his race came under fire after a spectator was killed in 1906, and Vanderbilt wanted a safe road on which to hold the race and on which other car lovers could hurl their new machines free of the dust common on roads made for horses. The parkway would also be free of “interference from the authorities,” he said in a speech.

So he created a toll road for high-speed automobile travel. It was built of reinforced concrete, had banked turns, guard rails and, by building bridges, he eliminated intersections that would slow a driver down. The Long Island Motor Parkway officially opened on Oct. 10, 1908, and closed in 1938.

Paul Daniel Marriott, a highway historian and consultant in Washington, said road designers began to take the car into account around 1900. Like Vanderbilt, these early car owners were mostly wealthy men; they were called “automobilists” on the model of “bicyclists.”

“Cars were seen as objects for leisure, something to be used on weekends,” Mr. Marriott said in an interview. “No one dreamed then of commuting to work by car.” The automobile was seen as way of escaping the tyranny of the railroad schedule, Mr. Marriott added. “It was a way of interacting with nature.”

To finance the parkway, according to historical accounts, Vanderbilt and his associates raised $2 million from investors, some of whom thought the road would raise property values on the Gold Coast of Long Island. The road’s cost eventually rose to more than $6 million, and a $2 toll (about $45 today) was established. Regular patrons of the highway could buy a medallion good for a year’s passage.

Even the toll houses were worthy of a Vanderbilt: the first six were designed by the architect John Russell Pope, who also created the Jefferson Memorial and the Theodore Roosevelt Rotunda at the Museum of Natural History in New York. The toll takers and families lived in the houses, called lodges. One of these has been moved to Garden City, where it has been preserved and houses an exhibition on the history of the highway. Other lodges became homes.

The Long Island Motor Parkway did not solve the problem it was created to address. The race was run successfully enough on the new road in 1908 and 1909, but there were two fatal crashes in 1910, pretty much ending road races on Long Island.

Soon, traffic grew light on the road. In the Great Gatsby era of the 1920s bootleggers found the parkway a convenient link between their delivery points on secluded beaches and the booming liquor market of Manhattan. The Vanderbilt Cup Race moved elsewhere, notably to Roosevelt Raceway in 1936 and 1937, when Ferdinand Porsche arrived to watch his Auto Union take first place.

By then, the public had access to cars as well. When Mr. Vanderbilt began, car owners were feared and resented in many areas, and speed limits were set as low as 5 m.p.h. Woodrow Wilson feared that popular irritation at rich motorists would be socially disruptive. “Nothing has spread Socialistic feeling in this country more than the use of automobiles,” he declared in 1906 when he was president of Princeton University. “To the countryman they are a picture of arrogance of wealth with all its independence and carelessness.”

But by the end of Vanderbilt’s life (he died in 1944), the public had come to feel entitled to car ownership. And there was growing pressure for public highways, like the parkways that the urban planner Robert Moses was building.

In 1938, Moses refused Vanderbilt’s appeal to incorporate the motor parkway into his new parkway system. The motor parkway just could not compete with the public roads, even after the toll was reduced to 40 cents, and Moses eventually gained control of Vanderbilt’s pioneering road for back taxes of about $80,000. The day of public roads had come, supplanting private highways.

Today, the course of the road and a few ruined overpass bridges, guard rails and mileposts have been documented in books and Web sites, including VanderbiltCupRaces.com.

Part of the parkway and name survive as Suffolk County Road 67 (radio traffic reports still call the road the motor parkway). A small stretch was also incorporated into the Meadowbrook Parkway. But the best place to see remnants of the road is in Cunningham Park in Queens, where two of the 65 bridges that carried it over other roads remain. One is at 73rd Avenue and 199th Street. Another crosses Hollis Hills Terrace. Another original bridge crosses Springfield Boulevard. The old right of way is incorporated into the Brooklyn–Queens Greenway for bikers and walkers.

There is a certain irony that a road built for the most modern means of transportation is now being used for the oldest. The parkway marked the beginning of a process: the road was designed for the car. But in offering higher speeds, the parkway and other modern roads would push cars to their technical limits and beyond, inspiring innovation. In that sense, the first modern automobile highway helped to create the modern automobile.

> This is, I guess, the most comprehensive book on transatlantic car design. We were the ones who could do that. Phil was writing a hell of a lot of car essays full of fantastic ideas and information (like always).

> —Bernd Polster

## Foreword: Time of the Taylors

### _Autodesign International by Bernd Polster and Phil Patton, Cologne, 2010_

Automobile design is a young endeavor that for all the triumphs of its brief century of life remains less an art than a profession. And despite its stars it remains a collective endeavor, a team sport.

The first automobiles were the toys of the wealthy and the people who built and serviced them were a specialized form of servants, like tailors.

Indeed, the evolution of the auto designer’s profession can best be compared to the changes in the world of fashion and the progress from hand tailoring to factory made, sized clothing.

The first cars were ordered individually and to taste and measured like suits or ball gowns. Their bodies were created separate from their chassis and engines and then mated together. In time, shows and catalogs offered choices of bodies for reproduction or modification, the way haute couture offers models on the runways of fashion shows.

A large corporation seeking a design for its products at first took the same approach as a wealthy individual seeking a design for his car: it went out and hired one. But with the coming of mass production, companies from Ford to Fiat hired suppliers for bodies, who in turn hired designers. Soon, whole design departments were established.

Before long, advances in automobile technology meant a fresh model almost every year. The annual model change locked the auto industry more firmly into the fashion pattern of change—sometimes change for its own sake.

The modern profession arguably has its birth in 1926 when Alfred Sloan, the visionary manager behind General Motors, brought Harley Earl from Hollywood to create the “art and color” section for his company. The goal was to set up a ladder of brands, rising in price and prestige, signaled by design, from Chevrolet to Cadillac, and to create novelty in appearance and excitement enough to drive the annual model change. Again the fashion association is apt: Sloan and Earl wanted to create novelty each year and to inspire discontent with last year’s models.

But with Earl the best comparison is less the clothing business than the film business. He had had begun his career designing cars for the stars in Hollywood. He lived next door to Cecil B. DeMille, the famed movie producer. And Earl brought a version of the studio system to Detroit, where designers, working on “scripts” of drawings and clay models, competed in relative obscurity.

The association of auto design with Hollywood films was evident even at the time. Earl knew he was in show business. He was described in a 1939 _Fortune_ magazine story as “an immensely tall man of natty dress.” His approach, the writers declared “is of course anathema to those industrial designers who believe that form should be dictated by function. But such criticism would sound as out of place in Mr. Earl’s moderne workrooms as would a reproach to Darryl Zanuck for not eschewing happy endings.” Earl’s equivalent of the “happy ending” was the tail fin, his personal creation and a symbol of all that is superficial in car design.

In Europe the pattern was different. The arrival of mass production was slower and the tailors, to continue the clothing comparison, moved to limited production before full off-the-rack sales began. Coachbuilders turned out batches of bodies to fit chassis.

Pininfarina became the in-house design studio for Ferrari, while also serving other customers and the _carrozzeria_, Bertone, Ghia, Touring, Italdesign and others, continued to be called on by companies in America and Asia to supply that elusive quality, “style” or even “beauty.” But by the end of the first century of the auto’s existence, the coachbuilders or _carrozzeria_ were languishing and by the end of the twentieth century were dying.

But in the studios of Detroit or those of Turin, the answer to the question “who designed that car?” continues to be elusive. By convention, a lead exterior designer and a lead interior designer are now cited for most models, with credit flowing of course to the chief of design for the brand. But often great models are unassociated with an individual name.

In Asia, the collectivist mentality of business and culture continues to reinforce the earlier anonymity of designers. Car design studios the world-over today are filled with people of a truly international mix of backgrounds. Media has diffused the imagery of the automobile to every corner, so that the limousines of Europe or the sports cars of America inspire creative responses in the corners of the world where the bicycle and the three-wheeler are still the dominant devices on the streets. So a Korean creates a Detroit muscle car and a rural white American grows up to shape European luxury brands his grandfather never heard of.

And how to compare designs across the years, with the changes in technology and style? Arguably, the most beautiful designs from the standpoint of sheer curves and harmonies were the handmade ones that straddled the eras—those haute couture products of the 1930s made with industrial methods, embodied in the aluminum bodies of one-of-a-kind (or few-of-a-kind) Delahayes, Bugattis and other marques laboriously hammered out over wooden bucks or forms.

Among the finest of these were examples left stranded at the French pavilion of the New York World’s Fair when it closed in 1940. Fossils left on the beach by a receding ocean, they also lifted the role of auto design to one often played by art—to serve as poignant expression of the fleeting nature of life and culture.

> This is one of my favorite pieces by Phil Patton—because only Phil could have come up with the idea, which was ingenious. Who else could have seen a design story in the camouflage patterns that automakers use to disguise their top-secret new models?

> —James Cobb

(image: bookPP_dodge_durango_jul2010_brendapriddy.jpg)

##### A Chrysler variation of the “Van Gogh look” on a Dodge Durango.

## Secret Cars Kept Under Wraps, in Public

### _New York Times, November 5, 2010, p. AU4_

Celebrities wear disguises to dodge the paparazzi. Isn’t that Brad Pitt under the tweed flat cap and shades? Mel Gibson behind the silly mustache? Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen wearing cat whiskers?

The auto business, like Hollywood, has its own paparazzi, and the star cars wear their own disguises. So-called spy photographers like Brenda Priddy and Hans Lehmann use long telephoto lenses to capture images of the next Corvette or Porsche; the pictures are snapped up by car blogs and enthusiast magazines and carefully scrutinized by car-crazy readers.

In an effort to shield their still-secret products from prying eyes, automakers testing prototype models, often in the desert and at other remote locales, have long covered the grilles and headlamps with rubber, vinyl and tape—the perfunctory equivalent of masks and hats. Now the old materials are being replaced or supplemented with patterned wrappings applied like wallpaper. Test cars are wearing swirling paisley patterns, harlequin-style diamonds and cubist zigzags.

The vinyl wrappings are easier to apply and work almost as well as the older methods. While certain areas of a car might still be masked out or covered up, companies have found they save time and money with the new camouflage techniques.

The new patterns are often created by designers, according to Adrian van Hooydonk, design director for the BMW Group. And they are considerably less expensive than the elaborate masks that engineers once created.

That process was complex, he said: entire full-scale “bucks” of the new cars often had to be constructed, and then masking and padding had to be engineered for each one. Grilles and headlight shapes are crucial to a car’s identity, but to allow for realistic testing at high and low temperatures, engineers had to be careful not to cover the air inlets or alter the aerodynamics.

Mr. van Hooydonk said designers were pleased to take over the design of camouflage from their internal rivals, the engineers.

In the past, some test vehicles wore so many large boxy shapes that they looked like parade floats. The new patterns provide a sort of visual noise that hides the message, a buzz that disguises the tune.

Jim Dunne, a longtime spy photographer who famously bought land next to an automaker’s Arizona test track where he could set up his cameras, said he began observing the new patterns years ago. BMW used a swirling pattern, he said, which appeared on the new-generation 5 Series during testing near Munich. Opel and Saab have tried to hide their cars beneath checkerboard and harlequin patterns.

Ford once favored the look of repeated short brush strokes, as if done by a nervous calligrapher warming up. More recently, future Fords have worn patterns that recall caterpillars, microbes or a Keith Haring painting.

General Motors’ European subsidiary, Opel, has used vaguely biomorphic repetitive patterns that it calls fishies.

Other patterns attempt to visually break up the forms of the cars with bold shards that suggest World War I “dazzle ships,” painted with large jagged shapes to avoid detection by German submarines.

For instance, big pentagons have been showing up on some G.M. vehicles during testing, and the coming Buick Verano, a compact car related to the Chevrolet Cruze, was captured on camera in large triangles.

Even small manufacturers have joined the wrap party. McLaren tested its MP4-12C supercar with a pattern that looked like an oil painter’s rapid brush strokes.

One pattern is now so common that automotive photographers and publicists have given it a name, the Van Gogh look, a reference to the swirling, spiraling patterns in the artist’s _Starry Night_ painting. While BMW may have developed the first camouflage that resembled those swirls, Audi and other companies have also used it.

Fooling the eye may also extend to fooling the electronic eye. Ms. Priddy, the spy photographer, said she thought automakers had assumed the swirling stars—as well as fuzzy blobs once used by Ford—would trick the autofocus settings of electronic cameras.

“It didn’t work,” she said.

Many companies, like Mercedes, still opt for all-black cover-ups, Ms. Priddy said. But her favorite disguise, encountered several years ago, took a totally different approach.

“The preproduction GMC Express vans were ‘camouflaged’ as airport shuttles and plumbing company trucks,” she recalled.

> Phil Patton loved design. He was a student, a critic, and a historian who wrote eloquently about design, but, most important to us, he really understood the culture and the art of the car.

> During my twenty-nine year tenure at _Automobile_ magazine I had the good fortune to work with Phil who had a breadth of knowledge that made him special. In those days, we had incredibly high standards for writing, but he exceeded them.

> In this particular piece, Phil wrote about Frederic Sharf—collector of original drawings of production cars and early advertising. Sharf was a sports-marketing entrepreneur whose eclectic interests led him to cars via architectural drawings! He noticed that, in their renderings, architects would always draw cars next to their buildings. With interest piqued, Sharf began to search out car drawings. This just tickled Phil to no end. The story was quintessential _Automobile_ magazine.

> Once he was in _Automobile_, it was all I could do to keep Phil. I would have had him write more often, but everybody wanted him and he was curating museum exhibits, lecturing, and writing his own books. I was just lucky to get what I could.

> He was not just a lover of automobiles or a car design critic; he was a true journalist, and I found him endlessly fascinating.

> —Jean Jennings

## Old Dreams, New Art Form

### _Automobile,_ December 23, 2011

Fantastically long and low, with sheer fins and swooping bodies, they are dream cars on paper. But many of the drawings turned out in Detroit’s studios, such as those of early Motorama and other concept cars, were destroyed.

Saving those that remain, as well as drawings for production cars and early advertising, is the self- appointed task of collector Frederic Sharf, who has almost single-handedly established car-design drawings as a subject worthy of art museums and scholars.

These were the sketches and paintings created in the studios of General Motors, Ford, Chrysler, and other makers that dreamed up themes for future cars. Rendered in pastel or charcoal or Prismacolor, they reflect not only car history but alternative history. They show models that never were, like Carl Renner’s Chevrolet Vera Cruz and Peter Wozena’s Cadillac Coupe de Sabre, both drawn in 1950. Homer LaGassey’s 1960s Thunderbirds bound across asphalt as exotic jet airplanes—equally fictional—soar through the sky behind them. Other drawings represent the early stages of now-classic cars, such as Wayne Kady’s Cadillacs. (Kady designed the 1967 Eldorado.) Often the drawings were hyped up as tools to sell a concept to the bosses.

Sharf came indirectly to his fascination with the drawings. A successful sports-marketing entrepreneur, he has long been a collector with eclectic interests, from Japanese woodblock prints to British imperial documents. He began buying architectural drawings, the fancy presentations of planned buildings used to woo clients. The illustrations, by such stately firms as McKim, Mead &amp; White, indirectly got him interested in automotive drawings a decade ago.

“The architects would draw cars beside the buildings,” Sharf says. “I started to wonder about those cars.”

“There’s a curved-dash Olds,” says Sharf, pointing at a watercolor of a stately, ornate, early-twentieth-century office building hanging in his Park Avenue apartment. The cars help date the buildings, of course, but they also made Sharf realize that if buildings required drawings, so did cars.

“I became curious about the car drawings,” he said. “They also turned out to be evocative of their eras.”

Sharf had to go underground to retrieve the illustrations. He hooked up with researchers like Hampton Wayt, a young car buff who sought out the families of designers in Detroit and elsewhere. Through Wayt, Sharf found out about designers or their heirs who were happy to convey materials to him, knowing he would preserve them.

Security was tight in the design studios. For decades, designers lived in fear of the companies that employed them. _Automobile_ magazine’s Robert Cumberford, a designer at GM in the mid-1950s, recalls, “You could not leave the building with anything in your hands without a ‘package pass,’ and those were hard to come by. There were guys with pistols inside studios, keeping styling secrets in.” Those who succumbed to the temptation to take work home kept it quiet. There were exceptions, however, like legendary GM designer Bill Porter, who also values the pieces and has organized shows in Louisville and Houston to display car-design illustrations. Another was Renner, who drew up ideas for Motorama cars and later production models for GM design chief Harley Earl in the 1950s. “Renner told me that Earl gave him permission to take drawings home,” Sharf says. By the time Sharf came along, many of the veterans had been long retired, and the companies seemed to have forgotten about security.

Sharf now has thousands of car drawings, mostly from the 1930s through the 1960s. He also collects advertising art for cars, which is a more established field.

Not willing to wait for museums to catch up with his interest, Sharf installed some of his drawings at Boston’s Brigham and Women’s Hospital. He and his wife, Jean, had donated money to create a patient- admitting area there. Believing that art can humanize hospitals, he lent them some car drawings to display. The show drew visitors from outside the hospital—even outside Boston.

One of those visitors was a curator with the Toyota museum in Japan, Koji Yamada, who asked to borrow some of the illustrations. Eventually, a show of some 150 of Sharf’s images went to Japan. It has been on the road ever since, traveling to museums in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and Nova Scotia, along with the Studebaker National Museum in South Bend, Indiana, and the Ringling Museum of Art in Sarasota, Florida.

When the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston displayed some of Ralph Lauren’s collection of cars, a selection of Sharf’s drawings was also exhibited. Sharf has donated many drawings to the MFA in Boston, of which he is a major supporter. Now, thanks to a bequest from Sharf, a new curator is dedicated to them.

In other shows, Sharf has focused attention on Hot Wheels designer Harry Bentley Bradley and the Fisher Body Craftsman’s Guild competition, which fostered the skills of young designers. For each show, he puts together a catalog with essays and images.

He has also lent and donated drawings to the Wolfsonian-FIU museum in Miami Beach, devoted to design, art, advertising, and propaganda. “Fred has been at the forefront of collecting widely overlooked works of designers who created American automobile culture. He’s led the appreciation of these beautiful hand-rendered drawings, especially at a time when digital imagery is dominating our visual culture,” says Cathy Leff, director of the Wolfsonian.

Other images have been shown at the Larz Anderson Auto Museum in Brookline, Massachusetts, where Sharf has a library and mini gallery of his own. “It’s a kind of laboratory,” he says. There, curator Sheldon Steele matches the drawings with cars from the area, where there are many collectors. Currently, Sharf and Steele are preparing a show on the British industry after World War II called_ Britain Can Make It_.

Sharf is not interested in owning the cars in the drawings. “I drive a ten-year-old Mercedes that embarrasses my housekeeper,” he says. “I’m interested in the people—and the stories.”

(image: 11-15-83 #3_carsketch.jpg)

##### Patton notebook, November 15–December 31, 1983

> Phil’s fashion sense never failed to impress his editors on the _New York Times_’ Autos desk (who had none). And he never failed to dazzle us by relating cars to shoes, of which his knowledge seemed encyclopedic.

> —James Cobb

(image: Prada WomenGÇÖs Spring_Summer 2012 collection shoes_Photo Credit Courtesy of Prada.jpg)

##### Footwear from the new fashion collection of Miuccia Prada.

## In Prada’s Spring-Summer 2012 Collection, Shoes with Tailfins

### _New York Times_, _Wheels_, January 18, 2012

Decades ago, Converse advertised its Chuck Taylor sneakers as “limousines for the feet.” Nike designed its Air Jordan 14 basketball shoes after Michael Jordan’s favorite Ferrari years before Ferrari produced shoes with Puma.

Yes, shoes are cars, but no one has made that point quite like Miuccia Prada, the heiress to the Milanese fashion house that bears her name, with her spring- summer 2012 collection of footwear inspired by the tailfins and flame paint jobs of midcentury automobiles.

The bright red and green shoes are accented with chrome and conical taillights worthy of Chrysler’s Forward Look. The outlines of classic hot-rod flame forms surmount high heels.

The shoes are only part of a wider collection of auto-inspired clothing and accessories, seen in a series of advertisements shot by the fashion photographer, Steven Meisel.

The scene in an ad is an old gas station, sketched out in Prada’s publicity copy: “Bathed in sunlight. Fueled by optimism. Girls and cars stop and stare at the future in this Technicolor mise-en-scène of desire.”

Holding bags decorated with graphics of tumbling dice and flame accents, the models are interspersed with ’50s cars, mostly custom, including a few Chevy Bel-Airs. The Prada campaign speaks of a world bathed in optimism, if not a negligible helping of kitsch.

> Phil didn’t write a lot of auto reviews for us, but when he did they were notable for his keen eye for detail—how else would we have known about the _käferfach_?—and withering judgment. “It is the rear end that nags the eye,” he wrote of the redesigned 2012 Volkswagen Beetle, his raised eyebrow fully on display to the reader.

> —James Cobb

(image: Beetle2.5Rear2.jpg)

##### Volkswagen’s redesign of the Beetle is intended to increase its appeal to men.

## To Be Cute as a Bug Isn’t Enough Anymore

### _New York Times, January 22, 2012, p. AU1_

The New Beetle is dead. Long live the all-new Beetle, as Volkswagen calls the successor, squeezing together the adjectives just as it has squashed down the roof.

The 2012 car abandons the iconic arched silhouette of its predecessor and in the process shifts its style and personality. The new model is six inches longer and 3.5 inches wider, making it more practical, Volkswagen says.

It is also more macho. “More power, less flower” is the slogan.

For Volkswagen managers, that means luring more men. No car had more female appeal than the New Beetle—according to VW, women accounted for nearly 70 percent of buyers.

At a press introduction last fall in the rolling hills of Northern Virginia, Rainer Michel, vice president for product marketing and strategy at Volkswagen of America, said he aimed to get the male-female ratio to 50-50; in the first few months sales were running 43 percent men, 57 percent women.

The successor to the New Beetle begins at $20,565, and $24,165 for the Turbo, which looks tougher with larger 18-inch wheels and a rear spoiler. VW initially offered two engines: a base 2.5-liter 5-cylinder making 170 horsepower or a 2-liter turbocharged 4-cylinder rated at 200 horsepower.

A TDI version, with a 140-horsepower turbodiesel 4-cylinder, is to be introduced at the Chicago auto show next month and arrive at dealerships in late summer.

Like the New Beetle, the newest Beetles sold in this country are assembled in Puebla, Mexico.

Klaus Bischoff, VW’s design chief, said the designers were asked not to update the New Beetle, but to return to the original model to which it paid homage, the best-selling car of all time. They were given the paradoxical brief to “design a new original.”

The new car retains the round headlights of the New Beetle as well as the angular aero chin of the new generation of Volkswagens. A bar along the rocker panel—a vestigial running board, if you will—visually emphasizes the car’s length.

It is the rear end that nags the eye. The symmetrical double arcs of the previous model’s fenders have given way to an elongated rear fender. The lines of the fender, roof and hatch meet haphazardly, like the intersection of three meandering country roads.

Then there is that squashed roof. It makes the car seem deflated—the pneumatic New Beetle with a slow leak. As you look at it you get the feeling that when the designers finished the car they gave it a final whump on top—like the pat you’d apply to a fat Dagwood sandwich before you took it to the den to watch the second half of the game.

Even the Beetle’s color palette has been toughened up. Gone are the soft blues, greens and yellows in favor of harder hues including a bold Tornado Red and a brighter yellow.

Inside, the designers succeeded in replacing fashion- victim style with usable space. The Siberia atop the New Beetle’s dashboard—a vast expanse where Ray Bans and ChapSticks were exiled beyond reach—has shrunk to a more sensible proportion.

A clever mechanism releases and slides the front seat, giving access to the rear. Back there, amazingly, is enough headroom for a 6-footer, thanks to a scoop in the roof liner, though legroom is still minimal.

The instrument panel offers a nicely arranged trio of instruments, suggesting, oddly, the three arcs of the body of this car’s predecessor. On some models, the dashboard wears attractive body-color paint. Another option is simulated carbon fiber.

But the big change inside the Beetle is the disappearance of the flower vase. The vase was the soul of the New Beetle and its absence is more proof of VW’s determination to de-feminize the car.

Introduced in 1998, the cutely geometric New Beetle was a lovable, rolling logo of a car. It was the production version of the Concept One, famously designed in California by J Mays and Freeman Thomas, two future Detroit design stars. The car was partly shaped by the change from the original Beetle’s configuration (rear engine, rear drive, air-cooled) to the more conventional modern format (front engine, front drive, water-cooled). The latest car is front-drive as well.

The vase was a sly reference to VW’s flower power days of the 1960s, and it also summed up the fun of the New Beetle’s design. Surprisingly, drivers actually put flowers in the bud vase, albeit often artificial ones. I had expected that after a while the vases would be empty or stuffed with Bic pens and Burger King straws. But if you peer into a New Beetle on the street, you’re likely to spot a silk rose or a paper daisy.

The banishment of the vase to VW’s attic seems to sum up a shift in how the company views the car. It’s as if responsibility for Beetles was wrested from the designers and handed over to the engineers.

In place of the flower vase, Mr. Michel and other VW executives talk about the car’s second glove box, which they call the _käferfach_. (_Käfer_ is the German word for beetle.)

At the press introduction, Mr. Michel held up a finely shaped piece of metal—the latch for the compartment. The sleek shape was worthy of the Apple designer Jonathan Ive. It screamed, “Attention to detail: German engineering.” But touch the latch and it tricks you: rather than simply popping the door, it requires a second pull before the lid opens upward—an unpleasant ergonomic surprise.

The _käferfach_ may be a geeky engineer’s answer to the flower vase, but it is not equivalent. And while the flower is gone, it is less clear how much power has been added.

On the hills and curves of Virginia, the base model proved competent if unexciting, and the Turbo was surprisingly unsporty. All Beetles have antilock brakes and electronic stability control. The Turbo comes with electric power steering and a stiffer suspension, but pressed on a hilly highway the car responded with surprising reluctance and an audible note of complaint, rather than the throaty enthusiasm of a good turbo. Engaging the Sport mode helped.

The hesitance seems to have less to do with turbo lag than with the available dual-clutch automated manual transmission. The overall feel falls short of the promise of the German engineering, and driving excitement is limited. This still seems to be a car that’s about style.

While other retro brands like Mini Cooper and Fiat (with its coming Abarth version of the 500 microcar) have been careful to include sporty models in their lines, Volkswagen never introduced a New Beetle that was muscular enough to appeal to enthusiasts. There was no New Beetle equivalent of the Golf-based GTI, only the rare RSi with the powerful VR6 engine. And that car was not sold in the United States.

But Volkswagen says the new car has come in sporting form right from the start. “The Turbo is a GTI already if you want,” Mr. Michel said.

At the Los Angeles and Frankfurt auto shows, Volkswagen showed a Beetle R concept, analogous to the enthusiast-ready Golf R, with 250-plus horsepower and 4Motion all-wheel drive.

VW is also pushing customization programs, remembering how the original Beetle was dressed up and down, mild or wild, by doting owners. You can go sporty with the 19-inch spoked Tornado wheels or you can go retro-geek with black heritage wheels that have polished metal centers, giving the car the effect of black high-top Converse All-Stars.

The company offers a variety of add-on graphics called Second Skin as well as the option of displaying one of the car’s many global slang names—Bug, Käfer, Vocho, Maggolino, Fusca and even the Chinese character for Beetle—in raised metallic letters.

And for all its efforts to woo men, Volkswagen doesn’t seem to have repelled female drivers. One female fan was Oprah Winfrey, who gave Beetles to the audience of her “Ultimate Favorite Things” show.

Another was the woman I passed in Middleburg, Va., driving a yellow, scratched-up New Beetle. Her head swung around at the sight of the new model. “Love the rear end!” she exclaimed as she slowed to take a closer look. “I need a new one. My transmission is about gone.”

I began unscientifically surveying women driving New Beetles. Most were positive about the new car. “People who own these cars, we are a secret club,” one said. “I like the new one. It is more mature.”

Women may not miss the New Beetle, but this man already does. Impractical as it was, it added variety to the automotive gene pool. And why shouldn’t drivers be able to have both flower and power?

> When I was managing editor of _The Architect’s Newspaper_, I often commissioned Phil to write exhibition and book reviews. Here, he succinctly captures the magic of New York City’s grid: “without a center, anywhere could be central.”

> —Molly Fulghum Heintz

(image: 1811grid(1).jpg)

##### The Commissioners’ Plan of 1811.

## The Greatest Grid: The Master Plan of Manhattan, 1811–2011 at the Museum of the City of New York through April 15

### _The Architect’s Newspaper,_ February 10, 2012

Gridlock—the word has become metaphorically indispensable in dealing with Washington as well as New York. But in the beginning was the grid, the Manhattan street pattern itself, laid out in 1811, whose 200th anniversary is commemorated with an exhibition at the Museum of the City of New York (MCNY), curated by architectural historian Hilary Ballon.

Not until the 1980s did the word “gridlock” come along, the exhibition tells us. Formally certified on March 22, 1811, the report of the “Commissioners of Streets and Roads in the City of New York” offered a plan its authors promised would “unite regularity and order with the Public convenience and benefit.” The ur-grid, the Commissioners’ Map, is on display as the centerpiece of the show.

The report justified the grid pattern with the reasoning that “a city is to be composed principally of the habitations of men, and that straight-sided and right-angled houses are the most cheap to build and the most convenient to live in.” The words fairly drip with contempt for “circles, ovals, and stars” and other ornamental shapes. The grid, with its 12 avenues and 155 streets laid out under the director of chief surveyor John Randel, became the grammar of the city. In its interaction with older streets and buildings, it produced such irregular effects as the mad intersection of 4th Street with 11th and 12th streets. Or the absent block of 11th Street at Broadway where James Renwick’s Grace Church sits. The grid is also the basis of Manhattan architecture, providing unconscious, de facto specs for builders. The grid’s champions praise the architectural creativity it has engendered. Its critics condemn the grid as generating architectural mediocrity and providing few public spaces and structures.

The exhibition is visually rich, dominated by a wonderful group of maps. With their deep shadings and contours they recall the topography that the grid plan leveled out. Yellowed documents are the original embodiment of the grid and its rules; the whole display put me in mind of the old Freedom Train displays, born in Cold War days, of founding political documents.

Also on display are artifacts of the surveying methods that created the grid. Theodolites and drafting tools remind us that surveying was the high tech of 1800, embodying an idealistic Cartesian vision as compelling in its day as Google’s vision of the Internet today. (That Washington and Jefferson were both working surveyors, amateur architects, and land speculators says a lot about the cultural basis of the nation.) There is an example of a Gunter’s chain, the basic land measure that ruled land layout—a 100-foot block is really 99 feet, three 33-foot chains. A hewn stone landmarker is the closest thing possible to a physical embodiment of the theoretical grid.

The grid was at least as much a product of political expedience as of soaring vision. It provided the commercial advantage of generating neat modules of real estate and standardized building plots. But rather than creating standard architecture, champions of the grid argue that it forced architectural creativity, in the sense that greenhouses force plants.

Rem Koolhaas celebrates the grid in _Delirious New York_, calling it “the most courageous act of prediction in Western civilization: the land it divides, unoccupied, the population it describes, conjectural; the buildings it locates, phantoms . . . ” He argued that the grid made the city resistant to any overweening large architectural scheme, while the uniformity of blocks demanded variety in architecture. “In the single block—the largest possible area that can fall under architectural control,” he wrote of the grid, “it develops a maximum unit of urbanistic Ego.” The grid was the studio system behind the stars of the skyline, perhaps. John Kouwenhoven, in his classic essay in _The Beer Can by the Highway_, compared the grid to jazz. He associated the grid with jazz’s basic 4/4 or 2/4 beat and the skyscrapers towering above the grid with improvisational solos.

Critics of the grid focus on its failure to provide public space. The New York grid lacked the many public squares of other grid plans, notably those of Savannah and Philadelphia, noted Vincent Scully, who saw it as the beginning of America’s neglect of shared spaces. “The grid so applied might be slapped down anywhere,” he wrote, “and usually all too little public space is left free in the process. The later American tendency toward private luxury and public squalor was already well enough in evidence here.” John Reps, the eminent historian of the American city, saw the New York grid as the first fatal step toward the dull gridded cities of the West. Henry James called it a “primal topographic curse.”

The plan did call for two large publicly owned common spaces, a military parade ground uptown and a market place, but neither was realized as planned. Instead, the exhibition documents, now-familiar public spaces originated in periodic fits of public idealism, private generosity, and speculative innovation. Parks and squares showed up in odd-shaped parcels left by accidents of the map and the land. Mayor Philip Hone led the creation of Washington Square, which served as an early drilling space for militia, while Gramercy Park was laid out on swampy land by a developer with the Dickensian name of Samuel Ruggles.

Manhattan’s grid presents practical drawbacks to daily life. The cultural geographer J. B. Jackson famously praised city plans with alleys that provide access for deliveries and removals. But on the grid, garbage sits waiting for pickup beside the entrance to even the most stately mansion.

Another of the critics of the grid was Frederick Law Olmsted, whose looping, biomorphic paths in Central Park map a visual reproach to the angles of the city street. Olmstead also attacked the grid as a handicap to architecture. “There is no place in New York where a stately building can be looked up to from base to turret,” he wrote, “none where it can even be seen full in the face . . . none where it can be viewed in advantageous perspective.”

And—in a famous sentiment displayed in large type on the gallery wall—Olmsted lamented the decentralization the grid imposed. “Such distinctive advantage of position as Rome gives St. Peter’s, Paris the Madeleine, London, St. Paul’s, New York, under her system, gives to nothing.”

But a city without a central cathedral or palace was more a democratic society and, in a city without a center, anywhere could be central. The grid may have democratized land ownership, as some historians argue, assisting in the distribution of large estates into the hands of mechanics and merchants. It allowed the economic and cultural center of the city to move uptown, through the porous sponge of the grid. “This is the purpose of New York’s geometry,” Roland Barthes wrote. The grid might lack a cathedral but it let the name of Frank Woolworth tower above all, for at least a few years.

But bringing into the gallery the sense of the grid as perceived on the street or in the popular mind is harder. How to represent the mesmerizing quality of the short blocks that make people walk farther than they plan, or the flickering passage of street numbers in a taxi window, like shuffling cards? First-time visitors to Manhattan tend to comment first on its winds and shadows, because just as the grid defied topography, it defied the sun and wind and sought to align itself with the compass, so the prevailing westerlies whistle through darkened skyscraper canyons—the word has become unavoidable.

In _Waterfront: A Walk around Manhattan_, Phillip Lopate writes while “one hears the Manhattan grid disparaged today as merely a capitalist device for real- estate speculation, to me it is a mighty form, existential metaphor, generator of modernity . . . it inspired Mondrian, Sol Lewitt, Agnes Martin, and that’s good enough for me.” Mondrian’s iconic _Broadway Boogie Woogie_ is a reminder that the grid represents only one aspect of the city’s spiritual map: its counterpoint is the defiant, dynamic sash of Broadway. Broadway was the avenue of dreams, the impetuous id in contest with the responsible superego of the grid.

Such “dramas of triangulation” are the focus of one of the entries in the MCNY’s companion exhibition, _The Unfinished Grid: Design Speculations for Manhattan_, a set of projects by architects on the theme of the future of the grid. The entry called _Projective Exceptions_, by Grant Alford assisted by Spencer Lindstrom, was inspired by the Flatiron building neighborhood and suggests three new angled exceptions to the grid.

The sidebar show was curated by Gregory Wessner and sponsored by the museum, the Architectural League, and Architizer. The more than 120 entrants were asked to speculate on how the grid might be adapted, extended, or transformed. The eight projects picked by the jury offer a refreshing mix of ground-level innovations with grand thinking. One effort, _6 ¼ Avenue_, by ksestudio and others, offers ideas for a new corridor of mid-block open space that has informally sprouted up between 6th and 7th avenues. _Dissociative New York_ by Joshua Mackley and Mathew Ford experiments with a new kind of regulatory structure “that would remove absolutely all regulations (zoning, preservation) from the avenues, while simultaneously freezing in their current state all the streets in perpetuity.” In _Tabula Fluxus: A New Topography for Tourists_, Yikyu Choe, Michael Chaveriat, and Myung Kweon Park appreciate Manhattan’s grid so much they suggest building a second one—700 feet above today’s street level.

Clearly, where the grid is most firmly locked is in the thinking of those on its streets.

> An offhand reference in _Mad Men_ provided fodder for a fascinating discussion of a small Chevrolet that proved to be a lemon.

> —James Cobb

(image: 1971 Chevrolet Vega 215485.jpg)

##### The 1971 Chevrolet Vega coupe.

## Spoiler Alert: Mad Men’ Shifts Gears

### _NYTimes.com_, _Wheels: The Nuts and Bolts of Whatever Moves You, May 6, 2013_

Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce, the fictional advertising agency portrayed on the AMC series _Mad Men_, has given up Jaguar for a new automotive client: Chevrolet. The agency’s mandate, as seen in Sunday night’s episode, is to introduce a hot new model referred to as the XP-887.

That jumble of digits naturally set viewers to Googling—as Matthew Weiner, the show’s creator, undoubtedly anticipated. XP-887 turns out to have been Chevrolet’s internal designation for the Vega, the compact car introduced with great fanfare for the 1971 model year and produced with ever decreasing fanfare until 1977.

Jaguar was previously depicted as SCDP’s big automotive break. But from the perspective of the late 1960s, what ad agency could resist a chance to work with the great General Motors?

In real life, the agency responsible for promoting the Vega was Campbell Ewald, which had handled Chevrolet’s accounts for decades. Named for a star, the Vega was anything but, becoming an unfortunate benchmark for underwhelming Detroit compacts. (The Ford Pinto and the AMC Gremlin were also noted failures.)

The Vega was developed in just two years under the leadership of Ed Cole, who had also been the executive behind the Corvair. The rear-wheel-drive Vega featured a handsome design reminiscent of Italian GT cars of the previous decade and suggestive of the Vega’s kinship with the Camaro. It featured a lightweight aluminum- block engine intended to increase fuel efficiency.

But the Vega’s problems were many. Its engine proved unreliable—plagued with cooling problems and related component failure—and because of inadequate rustproofing, the cars’ Fisher-built bodies rusted with legendary speed. General Motors had even skimped on including inner fender liners, so the cars had a reputation for needing new fenders after only a couple of years on the road.

Laurene Leon Boym, a designer who saw through the show’s clever placement of the little-known Vega codename, promptly tweeted a vintage Vega ad which was laden with now-embarrassing encomiums for the car from major auto magazines. (_Motor Trend_ actually named it Car of the Year in 1971.)

Ms. Boym recalled the Vega she grew up with in Rumson, N.J., in the 1970s.

“My mom had a Vega in Marigold Yellow,” she said in an e-mail. “What a cruddy car! It was a typical suburban second car. It stalled all the time.”

The family’s Vega was a two-door with a manual transmission, she said; one of a number of cars the family owned.

“Nobody in the family liked driving stick, except for my 9-year-old sister,” said Ms. Boym. “She liked to drive to downtown Rumson to Briody’s Irish Pub to pick up a pizza when my parents were in the city at the theater.”

Although that particular Vega was fit for a 9-year-old’s joy rides back in the ’70s, not many of the cars survived the twin scourges of rust and unreliability. There are scarcely any left on the road today, and those—perhaps surprisingly, to those who remember them in their dismal prime—are beginning to climb in price.

As one might have guessed, General Motors was not consulted by the show’s producers prior to Sunday’s installment. “Chevrolet was not involved” in the episode’s production, said Cristi Vazquez, a Chevrolet spokeswoman.

For its part, the real Jaguar will continue to watch the drama unfold with interest.

“As _Mad Men_ fans we knew the Jaguar story line could one day come to an end, and knew their client loyalty was always in question,” said Stuart Schorr, a Jaguar Land Rover spokesman. “We will definitely be watching to see how Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce does with their new automotive client.”

> Before hardly anyone noticed, a celebrated space by Frank Lloyd Wright was obliterated. This postmortem went beyond architecture and history to celebrate the showroom’s role in the ascendance of imported automobiles.

> —James Cobb

(image: 1137600004.jpg)

##### In 1955, new Porsches were displayed on the spiral ramp of the Park Avenue showroom designed by Frank Lloyd Wright.

## Wright’s New York Showroom, Now Just a Memory

### _New York Times, June 23, 2013, p. AU5_

A small landmark of New York City architectural and automotive history disappeared recently, almost without notice. The theatrical auto showroom designed by Frank Lloyd Wright at 430 Park Avenue, at 56th Street, had displayed a number of European brands over the years, notably Mercedes-Benz from 1957 to 2012.

The space, with a spiral ramp and turntable interior, was designed in 1954 for the pioneering auto importer Max Hoffman.

In early April, the Wright interior was demolished by the owners of the building, Midwood Investment and Management and Oestreicher Properties. Debra Pickrel, a preservationist and co-author of _Frank Lloyd Wright in New York: The Plaza Years, 1954–1959_ (Gibbs Smith, 2007) wrote about the showroom’s destruction in _Metropolis_ magazine.

Born in Austria, Maximilian Hoffman immigrated to New York with the outbreak of World War II. In 1947, he established a firm to import little-known European brands to New York and the West Coast.

Hoffman first intended the showroom for Jaguars. Drawings from the Wright archives show a leaping Jaguar sculpture and planters. But by the time the showroom was completed, Jaguar had set up its own sales space. Instead, the Hoffman space was filled with a mix of cars, including Porsches, for which he was the official importer to the United States.

The first drawings for the showroom have pedestrians on Park Avenue looking into the space. A rotating turntable held three or four cars; a ramp behind it accommodated one or two more. That spiral anticipated the design of the Guggenheim Museum, which opened in 1959.

The showroom was never considered a major work. In 1966, the architecture critic of the _New York Times_, Ada Louise Huxtable, who died in January, referred to it as “cramped.”

But it was one of a handful of Wright buildings in the New York area, and its form has a definite place in key themes of Wright’s work, according to historians like David G. DeLong, professor emeritus of architecture at the University of Pennsylvania.

Part of Wright’s fee for the design work was two Mercedes-Benzes, according to Douglas Steiner, who has written extensively about the architect. Wright also designed a house for Hoffman in Rye, N.Y.

Almost alone, it seems, Mr. Hoffman saw a market for European luxury models in New York and Beverly Hills. Beginning in the late 1940s, he imported a wide range of brands, including Delahaye and Austin.

He was willing to take a chance on the former Third Reich’s people’s car, the Volkswagen, which eventually became a huge hit. He also offered the Jowett Jupiter, which was not.

Hoffman met Ferry Porsche, son of the company’s founder, in 1950 and began importing Porsches to New York. He often raced cars himself to publicize the brands. Hoffman was known for coming up with ideas for new models that would sell well in the United States, suggesting the series production of the Mercedes 300SL Gullwing and the Porsche Speedster to their respective manufacturers.

In 1958, Mercedes-Benz bought out Hoffman and remained in the Park Avenue space, through two renovations, until decamping last year for a larger showroom in a new dealership on Eleventh Avenue.

To students of Wright’s work, the showroom ramps recall larger designs. One was the never-built Gordon Strong Automobile Objective, a mountaintop tower imagined in 1924 for a wealthy client. It was to be a structure where cars would park at the culmination of a scenic drive in Maryland. The other is the Guggenheim Museum, which resembles the Automobile Objective tower flipped on its head.

Janet Halstead, executive director of the Frank Lloyd Wright Building Conservancy, a Chicago-based group dedicated to preserving Wright’s work, said that after learning of the planned demolition last June from one of its members, her organization tried to have the city designate the showroom as a landmark.

“We have a network of members and professionals who informally monitor Wright buildings in their regions and in the media, and we often learn about situations through these ‘Wright watch’ participants,” she said. “They constitute a kind of early-warning system for risks to Wright buildings. We sent a formal request for evaluation to the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission in August 2012.”

According to Matt Chaban of Crain’s New York Business, who reported on the events, on March 22 the commission called, and on March 25 sent a letter, informing the building owner that landmarking was under discussion.

On March 28, the owner applied to the city Buildings Department, a separate agency, for a demolition permit, which was granted. Demolition took place the next week.

“The Landmarks Commission was unaware that the space had been demolished until we had an eyewitness report that the space had been gutted,” Ms. Halstead said.

Calls and e-mails to the owners, Midwood Investment and Management and Oestreicher Properties, and to the building’s managers, were not returned.

The conservancy’s president, Larry Woodin, issued a statement reading in part, “It is very disappointing that the City of New York was not able to move quickly enough to prevent the demolition of this Wright space.”

Donna Boland, a spokeswoman for Mercedes-Benz, said the hope when Mercedes left was that the showroom would be leased to another car company. “We were shocked at the removal,” she said, “but had no say in it since we leased the space.”

> Much will be made here (as it should be) of Phil’s wonderful prose, his insightful observations, and his ability to take the ordinary and make it compelling and, ultimately, important. Anybody perusing these pages (without knowing him) might imagine a man, closed up in his room, a bit obsessive and maybe more loner than extrovert. But, Phil was never less than gregarious, kind, and generous to a fault, both personally and profes-sionally. In an ideal world this is what every educator (writer, teacher, curator) should be. Debates were always gentle- manly and well considered—except of course when it came to his beloved Yankees. Phil’s greatest joy in life was simply sharing his interests, eclectic research, and his sometimes off-beat obsessions.

> —Christopher Mount

## In Praise of Knobs

### _Car and Driver,_ October 2013

I like knobs. Steve Jobs liked knobs. John Varvatos, the fashion designer with his own Chrysler 300 edition, likes knobs. In fact, Varvatos has created what might be thought of as a temple dedicated to knobs. In his New York store, occupying the former CBGB, the legendary punk bar on the Bowery, he displays a prime collection of 1960s and 1970s audio equipment with large, brushed-metal knobs, solid as the turrets of Admiral Dewey’s battleships, faces gleaming with ever-shifting reflections. Touch the knobs on such equipment and they convey to the fingers a solid feel, light but sure. Turning carefully calibrated knobs can be immensely satisfying. They have the quality we are searching for and find largely missing in the many interfaces in our lives. We want the same happy relationship of finger to surface in a touch screen, say, as we swipe and pinch or drag and zoom. No wonder the knob is making a comeback. Especially in the complex infotainment systems where voice and touch have come up short, knobs are back. Ford executive Joe Hinrichs recently said he would fix the much maligned MyFord Touch with more knobs. Steve Jobs, who of course put a knob on the original iPod (Apple called it a “scroll wheel”), was also a big fan of the stereo equipment on display at Varvatos—those huge units from Pioneer, Marantz, and McIntosh, with big two- or three-inch knobs that could be tuned precisely. Jobs loved stereo equipment, and legend holds that McIntosh, along with the apple, was one of the inspirations for the Macintosh name. However, the ultimate knob experts may be Audi’s knob gnomes, researchers who are part of the company’s haptics team, which focuses on sensory—especially touch—experiences, in Ingolstadt, Germany.

The knob gnomes are proof that car knobs have become more than simple utilitarian controls; they are now elements of brand differentiation. Jaguar’s shift knob rises dramatically from the console on startup, and Audi is proud of what it calls the “Audi click.” The lab guys can show you on a machine the exact resistance that makes for the Audi click (it’s really a double click). Getting a knob’s feel right would seem easy, but after visiting Audi, other vehicle knobs suddenly felt sticky or mushy. A good knob can be as satisfying as precise steering or well-balanced brakes, while a bad one ruins the experience.

Knob design is part of the haptics discipline. The sense of touch depends on several different kinds of nerves. Each is named for a scientist; Ruffini endings and Merkel mechanoreceptors convey pressure and texture, for example, and Meissner’s corpuscles offer information from a lighter touch while Pacinian corpuscles, located deeper beneath the surface, require more pressure. But measuring the responses of these nerves is difficult. “Haptics are difficult to express in numbers. Haptic evaluation is very subjective,” explains Audi’s Johann Schneider, director of the company’s lab. The goal is for the driver to immediately feel comfortable and have a sense of precision. The knob team tries to define such elements as ease of motion, well-defined end stops, uniform actuation sound, and clear feedback. “You won’t be able to please every customer,” says Schneider’s colleague, Manfred Mittermeier. “Actuation haptics and operating acoustics are usually perceived subconsciously. If we achieve 80 percent, that means we have a very good concept.”

People often speak of good controls as intuitive, but that usually means they follow familiar patterns. Although a knob’s operation generally needs no explaining, it is not an especially apt control tool for every job. In his classic 1959 text, _The Measure of Man and Woman: Human Factors in Design_, designer Henry Dreyfuss states that the input device needs to fit the nature of input. He advocated one- or two-inch knobs for selecting amounts of things or quantities. Push buttons are better for choosing among discrete entities, such as park and reverse.

Even so, knobs in cars are taking over new functions. Ram is very proud of its dashboard shifter knob and highlights it in television ads. Car knobs are indirect evolutions of stereo knobs, and are, in part, based on the turn-and-push knobs devised by the late legendary designer David Lewis for Bang &amp; Olufsen electronics. He told me once that he first devised these knobs for a 1960s audio project, inspired by the big knobs already on stereo equipment, but placed flush with the surface and equipped with a “dimple” for fingertip control. “That tactile feedback of turning and clicking is reassuring,” Lewis said. “The idea was to concentrate many functions in one button.”

The best interfaces, he said, are those based on years of familiarity. “We were building on established conventions that were known and understood, going back to the early telephone.” Considering that today’s handheld phones are often nothing but a screen, tomorrow’s knobs will have to be good if they are to survive.

> Phil loved models and sketches. He was as curious about the design process as the final design. He was also keenly interested in the modeler’s relationship to the designer. For him, “Models are objects of design with great beauty and cultural importance, but are also tools of design.” He would marvel at how the process evolved with technology.

> —Cara McCarty

## A Concept Goes from Paper Sketch to Metal Reality

### _New York Times_, October 29, 2013, p. F4

“You can lie to yourself quite easily in a sketch,” said Niki Smart, a designer at the General Motors Advanced Design studio in North Hollywood, Calif., who makes dozens of sketches a day.

Most of his sketches sell cars of the future, but first they must sell his ideas to his bosses. While each bold drawing comes with the exaggerated wheels and fenders typical at this stage of car design, each also represents a potential vehicle. Mr. Smart often wonders if he’s fooling himself that it can be a good one.

“Is there really a car there?” he asks himself. He worries about how his bosses will react. “I wonder if they will see in it what I see in it,” he said. “Is it a good car? Is it the same car?”

Such sketches are the beginnings of concept cars, the dream vehicles that manufacturers display to sell themselves to the public. Some are lightly disguised versions of future models that an automaker plans to produce; others are science fiction fantasies; still others morale boosters for lagging companies. Rarely is a concept car turned directly into a production car.

One of Mr. Smart’s sketches turned into a Cadillac concept car called the Elmiraj, some of whose elements look likely to be adopted in future Cadillacs.

In August, the Elmiraj, a long and formidable two-door, four-seat coupe, was unveiled in Pebble Beach, Calif., at the annual gathering where the wealthiest car collectors, executives and design chiefs meet. Then it was displayed for the press in Detroit and New York, and sent off to the Frankfurt auto show.

But the life of the Elmiraj began with pencil and paper in California, where GM, like nearly 30 automakers, has located its advance design studio to keep its inspirations undiluted by the practical concerns of production design.

If the studio’s North Hollywood address suggests the sprawling lots of Warner Bros., think again: the studio looks like a small warehouse, shielded by tall walls and spruce trees. Inside those walls, a Google satellite view shows, is an oval of pavement. This is where clay car models are placed for viewing outside, because designers want to see their visions in natural light, though privacy must be maintained against early glimpses by outsiders.

This studio works on advanced ideas for all of GM’s brands worldwide and has an international staff of 70, including technology experts, modelers and paint and materials specialists. Mr. Smart was raised in Britain and educated at the Royal College of Art. He worked on the Elmiraj with Gael Buzyn, a French interior designer.

The designers worked with the Cadillac design language, a set of visual stylistic conventions called “art and science.” (Many brands have such visual languages, some with names like “fluidic sculpture.”) The art and science language—established in 1999 with the Evoq concept car—has been said to combine the faceting of jewels with the design of stealth fighters, to express both luxury and high technology. This formula helped Cadillac leave behind its image as a maker of gas-guzzling land barges and cars for Elvis.

Mr. Smart said the design brief for the Elmiraj was short and abstract, even banal. Clay Dean, Cadillac’s head of advanced design, called for a car expressing the future of luxury and the concept of “the drive.” Mr. Smart had already worked on a concept car with such nebulous marching orders, one meant to express “the journey,” which became the Ciel, an open-top hybrid shown at Pebble Beach two years ago.

Since concept cars give midcareer designers like Mr. Smart, 40, a shot at becoming a studio or brand design chief, he was delighted when his sketch for the Elmiraj was pulled from the stack of drawings from the studio’s designers.

He described his methods. “I do most of my drawings first in pencil,” he says, “then I scan them into the computer.” In the computer, sketches are fleshed out using software called Alias. From the first scratchy drawings, a more detailed vision of the car emerges.

As with most concept cars, the Elmiraj resulted from a choice among several themes, as designers call them, or basic ideas for the car. Four or five sketches are usually chosen to be made into one-third-scale clay models.

The unsung hero in the creation of concepts is the skilled modeler who helps the designer transfer visual ideas to clay. Digital technology lets designers scattered around the globe look at colleagues’ work on other continents. Long before 3-D printers arrived, car studios used computer-driven milling machines to carve full-size clay models.

But a human hand is still required for the final touches, to make sure, for instance, that the highlights of light appear energetic and alive. The computer can also lie, it turns out.

Mr. Buzyn, the car’s interior designer, noted that both he and Mr. Smart liked mid-20th-century modern furniture and brought its influences to the Elmiraj.

The Elmiraj’s shape suggests the influence of Charles and Ray Eames’s famous lounge chair and ottoman, he said. There is also something modernist in the use of undecorated expanses of material with minimal accents, whether it is grainy wood or dark steel.

The Elmiraj is perhaps the least decorated Cadillac ever, with only three air vents as accents on the exterior. Its grille is matte metal wire, a long way from the gleaming chrome egg crate of Cadillacs past. The interior is accented with bits of rosewood, the original material of the Eames lounger.

The Elmiraj is intended to shape anticipations of dealers and customers about a production model. Other concept cars have hinted at new technology. Elements of Cadillac’s Urban Luxury Concept, a gasoline-electric hybrid unveiled at the 2010 Los Angeles Auto Show that Mr. Smart worked on, will show up in the Cadillac ELR, the extended-range electric model due soon.

Mr. Smart said he wanted Elmiraj to have a sense of presence and prestige, like large Cadillacs of the past. “I grew up near Silverstone”—a racetrack in Britain—“and my father worked with exhaust systems,” Mr. Smart said. “I looked at all his old magazines and saw those long, low American cars.”

Early in 2013, Mr. Smart signed off on the final version of the Elmiraj clay model and it was sent to Detroit for construction of the actual metal show car. The car was finished in July, a month before its unveiling; sometimes, construction goes on almost until a concept car’s curtain time.

Some concept cars are poorly received, seen as false promises by a company. But the Elmiraj met almost universal approval. “The most beautiful thing to come out of Detroit in years,” raved Autoweek. The late-night television host Jay Leno, a noted car collector, praised the Elmiraj.

Automotive cognoscenti speculate that the Elmiraj’s lines will appear on a future production car, perhaps the four-door flagship model Cadillac needs to compete with the BMW 7 series or the Mercedes S-Class. This would be built on what GM engineers call the Omega platform, a worldwide specification for engine and chassis arrangement. There is a lot of reality in the Elmiraj design.

There is, however, one lie—under the hood. The car’s supercharged V-8 engine is an engineer’s fantasy in these days of stricter mileage standards. The rule is almost ironclad: concept cars boast unrealistic horsepower.

> Whenever I saw Phil at one of our events—from at the Guggenheim in New York to the Concorso d’Eleganza on Lake Como in Italy—whenever I noticed him across the room, seeing him smile or listening to him speak with his kind, subtle voice, I always knew that I was in for an engaging and sophisticated evening if we ever got to talk. Which I always made sure of, as I cherished our exchanges where there was so much to learn from. Just as from his contribution for my book on the BMW Art Cars. He loved them. And it shows in his text, which effortlessly blends Rauschenberg’s art historical achievements with his occupation for his contribution to the Art Car series. An entertaining read with so much information in every sentence—just like Phil!

> —Thomas Girst

(image: Robert Rauschenberg_P0002919_(c) BMW AG.jpg)

##### Robert Rauschenberg, Art Car – BMW, 1986. Silkscreened decals affixed to BMW 635CSi (detail).

## Robert Rauschenberg: BMW 635CSi, 1986

### _BMW Art Cars_, edited by Thomas Girst, 2014, pp. 88–95

### “Drivable museums would be great. This car is a dream come true for me.” —Robert Rauschenberg

Robert Rauschenberg spent his life trying to erase the boundaries between art and life. His Art Car for BMW, the 635CSi he unveiled in New York in 1986, was different from other Art Cars. It was not a racecar, intended simply to be viewed bearing artistic imagery as it sped through curves on a track in front of an audience. It was a production street car, “off the shelf, “ so to speak, bearing images of great art from history, filtered through Rauschenberg’s unique style and approach.

The sporty six-cylinder car looked like one you might find in a parking lot—except that it wore a black-and-white nude or “odalisque” by the French Neoclassicist Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres on one side, and on the other _Portrait of a Young Man_, by the Italian Renaissance master Bronzino, both from the Metropolitan Museum in New York.

Rauschenberg had spent his career opening his studio and gallery to the world, bringing ordinary objects from the street into his art. He had long wanted to reverse the process: to open up the museum and send art out into the street and wider world—to make the museum move, in short.

He fantasized about mobile museums, he said, and about the car he commented, when it was first publicly shown in New York, “drivable museums would be great. This car is a dream come true for me.”<sup>1</sup>

His Art Car was the museum that moved. By transferring black-and-white images of paintings onto the car itself, Rauschenberg made the car look as if he had sacked the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York for decorations, grabbing works off the wall. (Or at least posters of the Ingres and Bronzino out of the museum shop.)

In the paintings he chose Rauschenberg made subtly appropriate choices: the lush body of Ingres’s exotic odalisque evokes the sort of regard a fine automobile body does, and the dapper dandy in the Bronzino portrait, had he stepped forward a few centuries from the Renaissance, might have been just the sort of driver to choose the sporty 635CSi.

The car body also wears images of grasses and other vegetation from photographs Rauschenberg made. (He would soon establish a home and studio in coastal Captiva, Florida.) Images like film stills of a ladder and a geometric figure fill other spaces on the body. Antique plates from the museum decorate the wheels, a sort of joke about roundness. Rauschenberg signed the car on its hood.

Despite his initial struggle—“Taking the first step was extremely difficult. It was like being alone in a room with a beautiful virgin.”—Rauschenberg remained fond of the car. He went on to produce artwork inspired by the car, including a six-part series of aluminum and vinyl panels bearing similar images and called _Beamer_. The car was later included in the major retrospective of Rauschenberg’s work at the Guggenheim Museum in New York in 1997.

The Art Car was an apt token of the central focus of Rauschenberg’s art. In just about every possible way, he sought to merge art with the larger world, both geographically and intellectually. It was an impulse perhaps due to his origins.

He was born in 1925 as Milton Rauschenberg, in Port Arthur, Texas, a provincial city on the coast of the Gulf of Mexico. (Eighteen years later, blues singer Janis Joplin would be born here.) Military service carried him to New York, where he first encountered oil painting and found a vocation. He dropped his first name, in commemoration of his new life as an artist, and began calling himself Robert. After leaving the service, Rauschenberg attended the Kansas City Art Institute, and then headed for Paris. In 1948, he found himself at the famous experimental Black Mountain College in North Carolina, where Joseph Albers and John Cage created a seedbed of modernism. He moved to New York, where he met fellow artist Jasper Johns. In the 1950s, the pair engaged in a powerful competitive dialogue about the nature of art that has been compared to that between Picasso and Braque at the height of Cubism. Both sought to incorporate ordinary objects into their work, so that the line between the mundane and the aesthetic was blurred.

Responding to Dadaism and Duchamp’s rethinking of the pure object, Rauschenberg famously mixed and recontextualized the crudest of objects in pieces that were not quite painting and not quite sculpture; he called these Combines. They were the three-dimensional equivalent of flat collages, combining disparate objects in a mode akin to montage. The most famous combine is _Monogram_, created in 1959 from a stuffed goat with an old automobile tire around its neck.

Rauschenberg worked wonders from combinations of real-world objects, old tin cans, and plastic bottles, or bits of traffic signs. One series of work was made almost entirely of flattened cardboard boxes, which turned into an essay on cubism.

His art was a contemplation of appearances and depths, of dissolved objects and free-floating images. His mind seemed to populate a world where things and images moved freely and interacted promiscuously, as in a dream. Much of Rauschenberg’s work, and the BMW Art Car in particular, could be viewed as an extended illustration of Walter Benjamin’s landmark essay “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.” He was interested in all sorts of methods for transferring and reproducing images, as the transfers of art to the BMW. Experimenting with new techniques at such facilities as Gemini G.E.L. prints, he also became a technical innovator. He developed a number of novel methods for transferring photographs and other images to canvas, board, or metal. Solvent transfers, for instance, produced smeared or blurred images. They suggested more sophisticated versions of what happens when you spill the breakfast orange juice on a newspaper and the acid in the juice imprints a crude version of a news photo and headlines on the kitchen counter underneath. Such various chemical transfers had a dreamlike effect. After undergoing the process, the images grew rougher and less distinct, the way images do in mind and memory.

He pushed beyond technical barriers, too, reaching out to engineers. In 1966, he began a collaboration with scientists from Bell Laboratories, the high-tech research firm that invented the transistor. The joint effort was called Experiments in Art and Technology (E.A.T.) and in it, Rauschenberg worked with Billy Kluver to encourage collaboration between engineers and artists. For NASA, he met with the moon-landing team and produced a series of prints, in 1969, when Apollo 11 landed.

He wanted to transcend geographical limits as well and founded a unique organization under the auspices of the United Nations that he called Rauschenberg Overseas Cultural Interchange, or ROCI. For ROCI, he traveled the world, doing work locally and encouraging other artists.

From the beginning of his career, Rauschenberg also sought to transcend another barrier—that between the visual arts and performance arts, the musical and mobile worlds of music, theater, dance and opera.

This sort of sensibility meant that Rauschenberg came to the Art Car project feeling comfortable about art that moved and performed—as an automobile does.

At Black Mountain and in New York’s avant-garde world he had early on encountered such figures as composer/musician John Cage and choreographer Merce Cunningham. Among his first artwork were sets for theater and dance. In 1983, he even designed an album cover for the rock-and-roll band Talking Heads. His cover, for _Speaking in Tongues_, even won him a Grammy—the recording-industry equivalent of the Hollywood Oscar.

It was this sort of openness—to mechanism and to motion—that assured he would come to the BMW Art Car project treating the vehicle not simply as a high-speed canvas, but as art in itself. It was also a statement of aesthetic principle: the dedication in his life to opening art up to the world. In that sense, the Art Car Rauschenberg created for BMW is a prime symbol of all that he aimed to achieve in his art. It literally moves the aesthetic into the practical world and set art in motion through the ordinary.

##### 1 The BMW Art Car Collection, “06 | Robert Rauschenberg,” http://www.bmwartcarcollection.com/ 2011/05/06-robert-rauschenberg-bmw-art-car/bmw-art-car/ (accessed December 18, 2012).

> Almost every time Phil was going to come for a visit, someone in my family would wonder aloud what he’d be driving. The most memorable car might have been the bright yellow Hummer he pulled up in for Thanksgiving dinner one year. Inviting me for an after-dinner spin, this gentlest and most refined of men hopped into the driver’s seat of the monster machine and sped like a demon around our suburban neighborhood, with me, stunned, in the passenger seat, hand pressed against the dashboard for dear life, and my son, thrilled, sitting in the back.

> Was there something about Phil I had misread after years of friendship? No. The ride in the macho-mobile was simply one more sign of his amazingly curious and capacious mind. Surely he wasn’t enthralled with cars for their speed and power—or maybe he was. But he was also enthralled with knobs, grilles, logos, gadgets, technology, designers, and roads. Just reading the titles of his stories for the _New York Times_—“And Then My Car Chimed In, After It Nudged Me in the Rear,” “A Well-Received Concerto of Curves,” “Not Flared Nostrils, but Nostrils with Flair”—gives a sense of his meandering, stunningly sharp eye and brain. So I have selected a short article from the _Times_ titled “I Didn’t Recognize You from Behind,” in which Phil bemoans the homogenization of the taillight. I chose this because of a single sentence, in the third paragraph—you’ll know which one I mean—that epitomizes the insight, grace, and style that he brought to everything he wrote, whether a book or a simple news item.

> How much Phil saw, how much he knew, how much he told us about ourselves, and with what finesse he told us, whether he was writing about cars, running shoes, the Pennsylvania Turnpike, barbecue, coffee-cup lids, or the blues. How much I miss him.

> —Lucy O’Brien

(image: 2013_Lexus_ES_350_009_RET.jpg)

##### Lexus ES 350.

## I Didn’t Recognize You from Behind

### _New York Times_, March 7, 2014, p. AU2

There was a time when cars could be identified at night, even from a distance, by the shape of their taillights. Buicks often wore horizontal red bands stretching from fender to fender, Chevrolet designers favored circles in pairs or threes and Cadillac has kept finlike vertical blades to the present day, decades after it retired the tailfins it started wearing after World War II.

But look at the cars around you today: How many have a distinctive look at the back end? Probably not very many.

Rather, there seems to be a trend—especially pronounced among midsize and full-size sedans—toward generic, nearly interchangeable taillights. Flaccid and formless, they wrap around cars’ corners like the leaves of an indeterminate species of plant. In that respect, they fit with model names of indeterminate language or meaning: Camry, Elantra, Cadenza, Q50.

In contrast, the Mustang name conjures up a distinct image of a car with a clear identity—and an instantly recognizable style of three-bar taillights evoking the ones of the original 1965 model.

There are other exceptions, as well: the bold “keyhole circle” of the Jaguar F-Type and the two sets of twin lamps on the Corvette Stingray, which build on a Chevrolet tradition that dates to the late 1950s.

Just as the quest for better aerodynamics has resulted in many cars’ looking alike, common design goals have tended to produce taillights of a similar shape.

And if taillights seem interchangeable, it’s partly because they share a common purpose. Sweeping from the rear to the sides, they make the car appear longer and sleeker. And their almost liquid shapes continue the flowing lines that designers consider “natural” and “emotional”—two buzzwords for recent trends in styling.

Still, some brands have managed to keep a signature look. Most BMWs have adopted an “L” form. Dodge has gone to a “racetrack”-shaped graphic for the bold lights on the tail of its Charger and Dart. Volvo’s lights trace the outward rear edges of its cars and S.U.Vs.

Technology offers hope for a return to bolder brand-specific lighting. Designers and lamp makers promise that advanced organic light-emitting diodes, or OLEDs, will result in more expressive taillights.

These OLEDs would provide a near holographic sense of depth and motion as they illuminate. Audi has shown a prototype system developed in collaboration with Philips, Merck and the University of Cologne. One Audi concept is for a “swarm” of OLEDs distributed across a vehicle’s rear end that would shift right or left like a cloud of fireflies.

(image: 10289_2016_Forte[1].jpg)

(image: 14CHIM35158_PULL3.jpg)

(image: 2014-audi-q5-taillight1.jpg)

##### Can you name these cars? Clockwise from upper left, the Kia Forte, Chevy Impala, and Audi Q5.

> I’ve never worked with a writer so talented at plucking pieces of past, present, and future, at noting references to high art and common experience, at putting events in historic context, as Phil Patton. His tribute to the 1964 World’s Fair is a perfect example: Easy to read and packed with information I hadn’t known before.

> —James Cobb

(image: Unisphere_Cropped_Matt_Flynn.jpg)

##### The 1964 World’s Fair, held in Flushing Meadows Corona Park in Queens, could be seen as the last un-self- conscious public celebration of automotive culture. The Unisphere was the fair’s thematic symbol.

## When Cars Ruled the World’s Fair

### _New York Times_, April 11, 2014, p. AU1

From its humble origins as a Queens garbage dump—inspiration for the valley of ashes in _The Great Gatsby_—Flushing Meadows Corona Park emerged as the site of two world’s fairs, in 1939–40 and 1964–65.

The first fair laid out a glorious vision for the automobile: General Motors’ Futurama exhibition, designed by Norman Bel Geddes, depicted the multilane highways of the future. The second fair arrived with that vision mostly realized—and the automobile near the pinnacle of its power and prestige.

Fifty years ago, Lee A. Iacocca unveiled the Mustang even before the fair’s opening day, with a press conference on April 13, 1964. But there were many other auto-centered displays throughout the fair’s run. Chrysler showed cars with turbine engines; General Motors offered concept cars shaped like jet planes.

But in retrospect, the second fair can be seen as the last un-self-conscious public celebration of automotive culture before concerns about safety and fuel economy changed it forever. Ralph Nader’s _Unsafe at Any Speed_ would be published the month after the fair closed; waiting in the wings were the OPEC fuel crises and the mass invasion of economical, reliable cars and trucks from Japan.

As in 1939, the transportation area where the auto pavilions were situated was across the Grand Central Parkway, south of the main part of the fair and reached by pedestrian overpasses.

While American Motors was not represented, Detroit’s Big Three competed in their presentations. Ford claimed its pavilion was the largest at the fair: “A journey of imagination across time and space” that extended “nearly three football fields!” But the facade of G.M.’s pavilion towered high above it.

G.M. showed a colony on the moon. It included vehicles, of course, called lunar crawlers. But Chrysler had real moon rockets.

At the Ford pavilion, some of the new Mustang convertibles, along with models like Falcons and Galaxies—were pressed into service on the moving belt of the Magic Skyway ride, designed by Walt Disney. Visitors sat in the cars as they rolled past displays of mechanically animated dinosaurs, mammoths and a Neanderthal man.

General Motors decided to repeat its successful strategy from 1939 with the Futurama II display. It included dioramas suggesting how the world would continue to be developed. In the year that the Beatles arrived and Bob Dylan went mainstream, G.M. showcased a particularly myopic vision of the future.

Its pavilion showed gigantic machines for conquering the oceans, the deserts and the Arctic. What was then jungle—rain forest, in today’s parlance—would be conquered by an atomic-powered 300-foot-long machine that would cut trees with lasers, spread herbicide and extrude behind it a four-lane freeway at a rate of a mile an hour.

G.M. did show more practical technology, such as a fuel cell and a turbine engine. And in addition to its dream cars, G.M. displayed future products of its other divisions, including five dream kitchens.

Chrysler, however, may have offered the most popular display of the domestic automakers. Among the attractions on five islands, linked by bridges in a six-acre artificial lake, were a puppet show and an airborne ride over a simulated assembly line on Production Island. There was a building-size automobile model that children could scramble through.

Chrysler even offered a space-age jet car: one of the 50 operational Turbine Cars that the company produced. The body, however, was less futuristic: It resembled a 1964 Ford Thunderbird.

The designs, directed by the corporate advertising manager, Richard E. Forbes, and the modernist designer George Nelson—known for his marshmallow sofa and clocks—were not only fun, but they impressed the critics.

Vincent Scully, the Yale professor and architecture critic, singled out the Chrysler exhibition as the best- spirited of the bunch. He especially liked the star display, a 100-foot-long model of an engine with animated parts; the crankshaft was personified as a 50-foot dragon.

The creators of the fair displays had reached the spirit of Pop Art, which was just arriving in Manhattan galleries, by a different artistic route.

Another example of Pop Art sensibility was U.S. Royal’s tire-shaped Ferris wheel, an 80-foot-tall pop concept worthy of Claes Oldenburg. The giant tire was eventually moved to Michigan and rebranded for Uniroyal; it still greets motorists alongside Interstate 94 near the Detroit airport, as if it had rolled there from the World’s Fair site, down the Grand Central Parkway, over the George Washington Bridge and out to the Midwest.

Avis, the rental car company, offered a carnival-style ride of antique car replicas. Sinclair, the oil company whose symbol was a dinosaur, presented life-size versions.

For those with more basic automotive sensibilities, the transportation zone also included a figure-eight-shaped track for the Hell Drivers stunt team and its Auto-trol show. Several times daily, the drivers leaped off ramps, ran on two wheels at 50 m.p.h., and played bumper tag in rugged Dodges.

The fair’s theme was “Peace Through Understanding,” but attendance was suppressed by rising crime rates and by racial violence in parts of the city during the summer of 1964, according to Joseph Tirella’s new book on the fair, _Tomorrow-Land: The 1964–65 World’s Fair and the Transformation of America_ (Lyons Press, 2014).

“The fair marked the last time progress was seen as an unmitigated benefit,” Mr. Tirella said in an interview. “It was the last cry of a widespread belief in technology—in a car, a computer or a toaster oven could save us.”

Just as the technological optimism of the 1939–40 fair was undercut by the arrival of World War II, the cheerful corporate enthusiasm of the 1964–65 version was countered by events outside the park. Civil unrest broke out in Harlem and Bedford Stuyvesant after police shot a young black man.

But in August 1964, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King visited the fair with his family. He rode Ford’s Magic Skyway with his children Yolanda and Martin III. Earlier, in the spring, he had declined a suggestion from other civil rights leaders for a protest at the fair, a planned “stall in” to disrupt area traffic.

Racial tensions remained high. Mr. Tirella’s book reports that one of the songs in Chrysler’s pavilion became the focus of a brief controversy when someone noticed that the tune “Dem Bolts” was a rendition of the black-face minstrel song, “Dem Bones.”

The fair seemed to aim for political neutrality. Jacqueline Kennedy and her daughter, Caroline, attended—one of the family’s first ventures into public after the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, whose younger brother, Robert F. Kennedy, came through on his campaign for the Senate. Richard M. Nixon, a former vice president at the time, received a warm welcome from the crowds.

Among the elements that physically survive is the Unisphere, the globelike sculpture that served as the thematic symbol of the fair—and occupied the spot held in 1939 by the earlier fair’s Trylon and Perisphere theme structures.

Part of the Chrysler display was incorporated into the New York Hall of Science; the rocket boosters have also been refurbished and kept on display.

A group of admirers hope to save the New York State Pavilion, designed by Philip Johnson. The site, now closed, will be open as a special event for the fair anniversary from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. on April 22. (In the 1997 film _Men in Black_, the battered towers of the New York State pavilion provided a UFO sight gag.)

The recently renovated Queens Museum, situated in the park, will also offer a show tied to the fair anniversary: “13 Most Wanted Men: Andy Warhol and the 1964 World’s Fair” opens on April 27.

One enduring legacy of the fair—especially for those who drive in New York City—is the Panorama of the City of New York, a room-size scale model of the city at the Queens Museum, in a building dating to the 1939 fair.

> Phil was brilliant at spotting trends before most anyone else, and skillful at finding texture and patterns in disparate examples. His piece on cars’ high-tech welcome mats wove many threads into a cohesive tapestry.

> —James Cobb

## And Then My Car Chimed In, After It Nudged Me in the Rear: High-Tech Grace Notes Alter the Driving Experience

### _New York Times_, September 19, 2014, p. AU2

Your car has something to tell you: Hello. Goodbye.

Today’s automobiles are beeping and chirping at us robotically like R2D2 or Wall-E, raising lights like stage curtains, playing little movies on our screens and serenading us with theme melodies like those of our favorite shows. When we approach, cars do everything short of sighing or cooing.

“We call it the welcome-farewell experience,” said Parrish Hanna, Ford’s world director of human- machine interaction. “It can be an emotionally resonant experience.”

Designers like Mr. Hanna are carefully orchestrating the experience of slipping behind the wheel. This has become more like entering a room than taking control of a machine, with hints of changes to come that may alter the driving experience as profoundly as the self-starter replacing the hand crank roughly a century ago.

For some vehicles, saying hello is simple. The Honda Odyssey and Hyundai Santa Fe display the words “Welcome” and “Goodbye” on their screens. Others show more attitude: As you leave one of Ford’s hybrids, you get a digital note of appreciation: “Thank you for driving a hybrid,” the screen says.

In luxury vehicles, there is more: Colors and textures on TFT screens match the leather and wood of the interior, and logos or images appear with animated razzle-dazzle. Door handles illuminate when the car senses one’s presence (or, at least, the presence of a keyfob). Headlights and cabin lamps rise and fall like footlights on stage; needles on instruments snap to attention and spin around in salute; graphic screen displays accompany theme sounds like the beginning of _Dallas_.

A few years ago, a driver was greeted only with a nagging chime that warned of an unfastened seat belt, and Chrysler’s brief flirtation with voice alerts in some 1980s models—“Your door is ajar”—fell flat. But now many cars have sound themes, like NBC Radio’s chimes dating to the 1920s or Microsoft’s Windows of today.

The Cadillac ELR, a plug-in hybrid coupe, plays a welcoming theme that is part Hollywood soundtrack, part jet-plane swoosh. Like some other Cadillacs with the Cue driver interface, the ELR nudges the driver gently in the rear end as part of its haptic warning system.

The latest fashion among luxury vehicles is the puddle lamp. Like Sir Walter Raleigh gallantly spreading his cloak over a puddle in the path of a lady—the epitome of Elizabethan chivalry—several luxury models greet drivers and passengers with “welcome mats” of light on the ground below the doors. The Range Rover Evoque projects the company logo on the pavement, a trick evocative of Gotham City’s Bat Signal.

On its new MKC crossover, Lincoln calls the feature Approach Detection. It illuminates a welcome mat of the brand logo and, Lincoln says, “Simultaneously, headlamps, taillamps and door handles glow with soft lighting tuned to complement the vehicle’s exterior color.”

Said Mr. Hanna of Ford, “You want to have cohesiveness and fit people’s mental models.” But part of the ideal welcome-farewell combination, he added, is to personalize the vehicle. Ford lets Mustang drivers select among various colors for the instrument panel lights. For the sporty Fiesta ST subcompact, the sound can be customized as well. A device called the Sound Symposer lets the driver mix the amount of engine sound fed into the cabin.

Kia says the NBC chimes were a model for its Sonic Branding design, new on the 2015 Kia Soul E.V. and Sedona minivan. Sonic Branding includes an initial sound called “The Rise of Surprise” and other sounds linked to safety and convenience features. Kia says the sound is intended to create a positive “emotional trigger,” and future models will have variations of it.

At Hyundai, designers try to reflect the brand and the character of the vehicle in the greetings, said Derek Joyce, a company spokesman. “We try to make sure it matches the personality of the vehicle,” he said. “An economy car might be cheerful, while in the Equus the sound would be more classical and mature.”

But often, cars end up sounding like computers or robots. That should come as no surprise, said Dan Saffer, an interaction designer who is creative director at Smart Design in San Francisco. With all their sensors and software, “cars have secretly been robots for a long time,” he said, adding, “The trick now is having the personality in not just the body of the car, but also in the behavior of the car.”

Other researchers have suggested that humans are hard-wired to approach machines as if they were people. The late Clifford Nass, a researcher in the Revs automotive research program at Stanford University, argued in his book _The Man Who Lied to his Laptop_ that we inevitably impute personality to computers.

In a test, Mr. Nass asked people to do a survey on how well they liked their computers. One group filled out the survey on their own computers and another on identical computers they had not seen before. Sure enough, the “like” percentage was higher for those who used their own computers. People, he concluded, did not want to hurt the machines’ feelings. “Although it may seem ludicrous, humans expect computers to act as though they were people,” Mr. Nass wrote.

But it is not clear that designers have figured out what kind of people. Too many of the new auto greetings grow tiresome and irritating—the automotive equivalent of AOL’s “You’ve got mail” notification. (At least one reviewer bragged about having figured out how to shut off the Hyundai Santa Fe’s greeting.)

Mr. Hanna asks, “Wouldn’t you like your car to greet you by name when you got into it?” Not this driver.

Perhaps future cars will greet us with something like Siri and her “How can I help you?” Several manufacturers seem to suggest this, by signing on for Apple’s Carplay or Android’s rival system. Cars seem likely to come to resemble mobile phones more and more. (Mr. Hanna came to Ford from the mobile phone industry.)

Mr. Saffer suggests that the ideal car would know our preferences, thanks to sensors and chips, and act like a personal chauffeur. Such a car would recall the design ideal of Dieter Rams, the Braun designer who inspired Apple. “Never forget that a good product should be like a good English butler,” Mr. Rams famously said. “They’re there for you when you need them, but in the background at all other times.” Perhaps the car will be like Carson, the taciturn butler from _Downton Abbey_.

Volkswagen may be thinking the same way. This year at CeBit, the European electronics convention, VW showed a concept design for an autonomous car’s interior. At the touch of a button, the wheel and instruments vanish and the driver’s seat shifts to passenger mode. The design’s name suggested a chauffeur or butler: “James 2025.”

### Bibliography

##### Albrecht, Donald and Chrysanthe B. Broikos, ed. _On the Job: Design and the American Office_. New York: Princeton Architectural Press; Washington, DC: National Building Museum, 2000.

##### Patton, Phil. “The Taxi As Icon.” In _Designing the Taxi: Rethinking New York City’s Moveable Public Space_, edited by Chelsea Mauldin, 17. New York: Design Trust for Public Space, 2005.

##### ———. _Made In USA: The Secret Histories of the Things That Made America_. New York: Grove Weidenfeld, 1992.

##### Patton, Phil and Bernd Polster. _Autodesign International: Marken, Modelle und ihre Macher_. Cologne, Germany: Dumont, 2010.

##### ———. _Highway: America’s Endless Dream_. New York: Stewart, Tabori &amp; Chang, 1997.

### Image Credits

##### Every reasonable attempt has been made to identify owners of copyright. Errors or omissions will be corrected in subsequent editions.

##### 20: Neil Selkirk

##### 40: Smithsonian Institution

##### 72: Greg Miller

##### 76, 80, 83: Richard Beenen

##### 100–9: James Wojcik

##### 112: By Huhu Uet (Own work) [GFDL (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html) or CC BY-SA 3.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], via Wikimedia Commons

##### 118: Courtesy of Bernd Polster

##### 124: Courtesy of Timex

##### 130: Courtesy Phil Patton

##### 145: Courtesy IBM Corporate Archives

##### 150: Courtesy of the State Archives of North Carolina

##### 186: Pixar Animation Studios

##### 204: Reuters/Jeff Haynes

##### 210: Village of Garden City NY Archives

##### 220: Brenda Priddy &amp; Company

##### 230: Courtesy of Prada

##### 232: Volkswagen of America, Inc.

##### 238: Courtesy of the New York City Municipal Archives

##### 246: General Motors

##### 250: © Ezra Stoller/Esto

##### 266: © BMW AG

##### 273: Dewhurst Photography

##### 275 (clockwise from upper left): Kia Motors America, General Motors, Audi of America

##### 276: New York World’s Fair (1964–1965); _14 official views, World’s Fair, New York, 1964–1965_ (West Nyack, N.Y. : Dexter Press, ca. 1964); T786 1964.C1 N5 1964; Courtesy of Smithsonian Libraries

##### All Patton notebook pages courtesy of Kathleen Hamilton.

##### Front cover Coffee lid: James Wojcik; Chair: Shaker Workshops; Laptop: Courtesy IBM Corporate Archives; Car: General Motors

##### Back cover Shoe: Courtesy of Prada; Typewriter: Courtesy of IBM Corporate Archives

### Contributor Biographies

##### Donald Albrecht is Curator of Architecture and Design at the Museum of the City of New York, were he co-curated the exhibition _Cars, Culture, and the City_ with Phil. Albrecht is also an independent curator and has worked for the Getty Center, the Library of Congress, and the Vitra Design Museum, among other institutions.

##### Michael Cannell was editor of the _New York Times_ House &amp; Home section for seven years. He is the author of _I.M. Pei: Mandarin of Modernism_ and _The Limit_.

##### James Cobb retired in 2015 after 28 years at the _New York Times_, where he was Automobiles editor since 1994. A Kansas native and a graduate of the University of Kansas, he was previously an editor at _The Detroit Free Press_.

##### Russell Flinchum is Associate Professor in the College of Design, North Carolina State University.

##### Thomas Girst, PhD, is Head of Cultural Engagement at the BMW Group. His most recent publications include _The Duchamp Dictionary_ (2014), _BMW Art Cars_ (2014), and _Art, Literature, and the Japanese American Internment_ (2015).

##### Molly Fulghum Heintz is the co-chair of the graduate program in Design Research, Writing &amp; Criticism at the School of Visual Arts and the co-founder of the editorial consultancy Superscript. Heintz currently serves as a contributing editor at _Fast Company_ magazine and _The Architect’s Newspaper_.

##### Paul Herzan is Vice President of Lily Auchincloss Foundation Inc., Chairman Emeritus of Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum, and frequent companion of Phil’s at too many auto shows to number.

##### Jean Jennings has been writing about cars and the car business for more than 30 years, having learned about cars at the kitchen table from her late father, Robert. She is a former editor of _Automobile_ magazine and currently operates the website JeanKnowsCars.com.

##### Cara McCarty is Curatorial Director at Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum. She first met Phil at the opening of her 1990 exhibition _Information Art: Diagramming Microchips_. He was curious about everything!

##### Christopher Mount is currently the Founder/Director of the Christopher W. Mount Gallery in Los Angeles and New York, which specializes in museum-quality exhibitions of architecture and design. A former curator at The Museum of Modern Art and editor of _I.D. Magazine_, he has over thirty years of experience as a museum curator, educator, writer, and editor specializing in twentieth- and twenty-first-century art, architecture, and design. Phil worked as curatorial consultant on Mount’s groundbreaking 1999 exhibition, _Different Roads: Automobiles for the Next Century_, at MoMA.

##### Lucy O’Brien is a communications consultant for museums and other arts organizations. Lucy and Phil met when she was working at the Museum of Modern Art more than twenty years ago. At the time—as luck would have it—they were both living in Montclair, New Jersey.

##### Wendi Parson is the Director of Communications &amp; Marketing at Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum. Parson worked for ten years inside Detroit’s automotive industry in communications posts at both General Motors Corporation and Ford Motor Company. Since relocating to New York City in 2004, she has collaborated with leading organizations in the design and innovation sector.

##### Chee Pearlman creates books, exhibitions, and live events from her desk at Chee Company Inc in NYC. She is the former Editor-in-Chief of _I.D. Magazine_, which was recognized with five National Magazine Awards under her tenure.

##### Bernd Polster, publicist and artist from Bonn, Germany, made documentaries for radio and TV. He is the author of numerous books on cultural history and design, including _Westwind. The Americanisation of Europe_ (1996) and _Design Directory USA_ (as part of a series on several countries). For his title _Und can man darauf auch sitzen / And can you actually sit on that thing?_, the only satirical history of design, he and his office was recommended for the German Design Award in 2015.

##### Neil Selkirk’s photographs have appeared in virtually all the major US magazines, and his work is in the permanent collections of The Metropolitan Museum of Art and other institutions. He divides his time between trying to figure out how to get his digital camera to do as it is told and trying to get his digital printers to generate the results.

##### Edward Tufte is a statistician and artist, and Professor Emeritus of Political Science, Statistics, and Computer Science at Yale University. He wrote, designed, and self-published numerous books on data visualization. The _New York Times_ described Tufte as the “Leonardo da Vinci of data.” Tufte and Phil started a friendship when Phil began researching “Up from Flatland,” the _New York Times Magazine_ feature.

##### Hampton C. Wayt is a twentieth-century design historian and historiographer who met Phil in 2010 through a mutual friend, Paul Herzan, Chairman Emeritus of Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum.

### Index

##### AIGA, 163–169

##### Albrecht, Donald,  130–144, 290 _American Heritage_,  171–179 _The Architect’s_  _Newspaper_, 239–244 _Autodesign International_  (Polster and Patton),  217–219 _Automobile_, 224–228 Automobiles, 44  Chevrolet Vega,   247–249;  design, 217–219  designer lingo,   193–196  disguising prototype   models, 221–223  drawings, 225–228  emblems and logos,   163–169   grilles, 157–160  Rauschenberg BMW Art   Car, 267–271  seat belts, 176–177  sketches, 261–265  taillights, 274–275  Volkswagen Beetle,   233–237  welcome-farewell   messages, 283–286  at World’s Fair,   277–281  Wright theatrical   auto showroom,   251–254

##### Bar codes, 175–176 Bathrooms, 58–59 Batteries, 177–178 _BMW Art Car_, 267–271 Broikos, Chrysanthe B.,  131–144

##### Cannell, Michael, 146,  180, 290

##### _Car and Driver_, 257–259 _Cars_, 187–191, 200 Catalano house, 152–154 Chairs  Adirondack, 35–37  aluminum lawn, 37–38  director’s, 37  ladder-back, 35  recliner, 38–39  rocking chair, 33–35  Cobb, James, 72, 186,   198, 210, 220,   230, 232, 246,   250, 276, 282,   290 Coca-Cola bottle, 53–55 Coffee-cup lids  design, 104–105  history, 105–109  overview, 101–103  patents, 110–111 Computer visualization,  65 Cotton picker, 174–175

##### Diamonds graph, 67 Digital rug design, 77–78 _Diversion_, 33–39 Do-it-yourself projects,  41 Dorton Arena, 151–152 Drawings, architectural,  224 _Dwell_, 151–154

##### _Esquire_, 77–78, 81–82 Eurocrats, 113–114 Euros, 113–116

##### Flinchum, Russell, 72, 290 Fry scoop, 179–180

##### Gadgets, 45–46, 131–133 _GEO_, 21–31 Girst, Thomas, 266–271,  290 Graphics Press, 69

##### Hammers, 147–149

##### Heat pumps, 174 Heintz, Molly Fulghum,  112, 150, 238, 290 Heritage travel, 199–202 Herzan, Paul, 156, 162,  290, 292 _Highway: America’s_  _Endless Dream_  (Polster and Patton),  119–123 Highways  accidents, 122–123  fever or calm, 119  Highway 61, 120–121  historical, 199–202  public spaces, 122  Route 66, 120–121,   187, 200

##### _I.D. Magazine_, 85–95,  97–99, 101–111,  125–128 Infographics, 64 Information design, 63–70 Innovations, 171–180 Interface design  for every object,   86–87  interface aesthetic,   89–90  mixing metaphors,   92–93  multiple interfaces,   87–89  as new field, 86  other senses and   places, 95–96  overview, 85–96  teamwork, 91–92

##### Jefferson, Thomas

##### gadgets and   inventions,   46–48, 131–133  traveling desk,   41–45, 60  writing boxes, 49 Jennings, Jean, 224, 290

##### Knobs, 257–259

##### Lasers, 173–174 Long Island Motor  Parkway, 211–214

##### _Mad Men_, 247–249 _Made in USA: The Secret_  _Histories of the_  _Things That Made_  _America_ (Patton),  41–60 Manhattan street pattern,  239–244 Manufacturing, 42 McCarty, Cara, 260, 291 Mechanization, 48 Mount, Christopher, 182,  256, 291

##### _New York Times_, 147–149,  157–160, 181–184,  187–191, 193–196,  199–202, 211–214,  221–223, 231, 233–  237, 251–254, 262–  265, 274–275, 277–  281, 283–286 _New York Times Magazine_,  63–70 North Carolina Country Kitchen, 73–75 North Carolina Country  Store, 73 North Carolina Museum of  Art, 154 _NYTimes.com_, 247–249

##### O’Brien, Lucy, 272–273,

##### 291 Office technologies  laptop computer,   140–141  mainframe computer,   137–138  overview, 131–133  personal computer   (PC), 138–140  personal digital   assistants   (PDAs), 141–143  telegraph, 133–134  telephone, 134–135  typewriter, 135–137

##### Packaging, 50–53 Parson, Wendi, 40, 192,  291 Paschal house, 153 Pearlman, Chee, 84, 96,  100, 291 Pixar, 187–191 Planned obsolescence,  57–58 Polster, Bernd, 118–123,  216–219, 292 Possums, 21–31 Prada shoes, 231 Prefabrication, 181–184 Pullman berth, 45

##### Railroads, 44 Rauschenberg, Robert,  267–271 Remote controls, 177 Route 66, 120–121, 187,  200

##### Satellite dishes, 172

##### Sears Roebuck catalog,  97–99 Seat belts, 176–177 Selkirk, Neil, 17, 20,  292 Sharf, Fred, 224 Silicon chip, 173 _Slate_, 113–116 Spirals, 81–82 Stereolithography, 167

##### Television debate sets  Bush-Dukakis, 1988,  207  Carter-Reagan, 1980,  207  Cheney-Edwards, 208  Clinton-Bush-Perot,   1992, 208  Ford-Carter, 1976,   207  Kennedy-Nixon, 1960,   206  overview, 205–206 Tufte, Edward, 10, 11,  17, 63–70, 89–90, 290 Typologies, 12–19

##### Universal product code,  175–176

##### _Village Voice_, 73–75

##### Wayt, Hampton, 204, 226,  292 _Wheels_, 231, 247–249 World’s Fair, 277–281 Wright, Frank Lloyd,  251–254 Wristwatches, 126–128

(image: Phil Patton #2.jpg)

##### Phil Patton (1952–2015) was a design journalist, curator, and author. He wrote regularly about automobile design for the _New York Times_. His books include _Open Road: A Celebration of The American Highway_; _Made in USA: The Secret Histories of the Things that Made America_; _Bug_, a cultural history of the Volkswagen Beetle; and _Dreamland_, about the culture of experimental aircraft. He has served as a curator for museum exhibitions, including _Cars, Culture and the City_ at the Museum of the City of New York (2010), _Curves of Steel: Streamlined Automobile Design_ at the Phoenix Art Museum (2007), and _Different Roads: Automobiles for the Next Century_ at The Museum of Modern Art in New York (1999).

##### He taught in the School of Visual Arts masters program for Design Research, Writing &amp; Criticism in New York City and was a contributing editor to _Esquire_, _ID_, and _Departures_ magazines. Patton appeared as a commentator on several television programs on PBS and the History Channel and was a regular contributor to CBS News, _Today_, _CBS Sunday Morning_, _The Charlie Rose Show_, _Fresh Air_, _All Things Considered_, and _Talk of the Nation_.